   #Medium alternate

   Sitemap
   Open in app

   (BUTTON) Sign up

   Sign in
   Medium Logo
   ____________________
   Write
   Search

   (BUTTON) Sign up

   Sign in
   (BUTTON)

From the Waist Up: The Male Gaze vs the Female Gaze

   sophia slade
   sophia slade
   9 min read
   ·
   Sep 28, 2021

   --
   (BUTTON)

   2
   (BUTTON)

   Listen
   (BUTTON)

   Share

   CW: Brief mention of sexual violence, still from the aftermath of
   sexual assault in a film

   I was raised on movies. My mom introduced me to Star Wars when I was
   seven. We saw every Marvel movie in theaters starting with Iron Man. I
   loved the Narnia and Lord of the Rings movies arguably more than the
   books. Movies, especially science fiction and fantasy ones, were and
   are a central part of my life.

   That said, many of them are shot in the male gaze.

   So what is the male gaze?

   According to The Conversation, in film, the male gaze “invokes the
   sexual politics of the gaze and suggests a sexualized way of looking
   that empowers men and objectifies women…(the) woman is visually
   positioned as an ‘object’ of heterosexual male desire.”
   Press enter or click to view image in full size
   X-Men: First Class (2011)

   This positioning is metaphorical and literal.

   The metaphorical aspect goes back to the idea that women are meant to
   be seen, not heard. They are love interests, eye candy, and sometimes —
   in my least favorite trope ever — sacrificial lambs meant to further
   the character development of the male protagonist. If they’re lucky,
   they’re the sexy badass who surprises everybody with their ability to
   fire a gun with their bazongas in the way.

   The literal part has to do with the framing of the shots and how they
   sexualize women. This is something present in many films, but it is
   especially on display in science fiction, fantasy, and superhero
   movies.

   Take a look at these posters for The Winter Soldier (2014) and Black
   Widow (2021) featuring the same character, Natasha Romanoff.
   Press enter or click to view image in full size
   Promotional poster for Captain America: The Winter Soldier (2014) and
   Black Widow (2021)

   On the surface, they might not seem too different. They both show Nat
   advancing on the viewer. They both show her full body in her iconic
   suit. But closer examination reveals the male gaze on full display in
   the Winter Soldier poster.

   First, check out her actual gaze. In the Winter Solider poster, Nat
   stares into oblivion with glassy eyes. Now, look at her eyes in the
   Black Widow poster. She stares the audience down, daring you to fuck
   with her.

   Moving on, her hair. I know this seems like a small detail but bear
   with me. Nat is supposedly headed for battle in Winter Soldier, but she
   looks like she stepped out of a Pantene commercial. Her hair in the
   Black Widow promo is braided. It looks cool, but the style is also
   practical.

   Her body is the biggest tipoff that we’re peering through the male gaze
   in Winter Solider. Her waist has been photoshopped to be
   unrealistically tiny and her breasts are inflated. They’re also resting
   at an angle that defies the laws of physics, but I digress. Her arms
   are splayed, leaving her chest exposed and breaking rule number one of
   self-defense.

   Now, look at the Black Widow poster. Her shoulders are squared, her
   waist and breasts are realistically proportioned, her chin is down as
   she advances on the viewer in her suit, which looks like it would
   actually protect her in a fight.
   Press enter or click to view image in full size
   The Dark Knight Rises (2012)

   The difference between The Winter Soldier and Black Widow? The former
   was written, directed, and starred in by men and the latter was
   written, directed, and starred in by women.

   Before we go any further, I want to clarify something. Nobody is saying
   every movie ever written by a heterosexual cisgender man is garbage.

   There are plenty of wonderful films with male writers and directors
   with stellar female characters who are not present simply for the
   pleasure of the male viewer. Little Miss Sunshine (2006), Spirited Away
   (2001), Parasite (2019), Us (2019), Juno (2007), A Quiet Place (2019),
   Mad Max: Fury Road (2015), and Sorry To Bother You (2018) all come to
   mind.
   Press enter or click to view image in full size
   Spirited Away (2001)

   There have also been a handful of MCU movies directed by men in recent
   years that break these toxic stereotypes. Black Panther (2018),
   Ragnarok (2017), Into the Spider-Verse (2019), and Shang-Chi (2021) all
   do a great job of not making their female characters 1D sex dolls or
   fodder for the development of the male protagonist.

   The trouble is, for every one of these subversive films, there are ten
   films that fall into the trap of the male gaze.

   Suicide Squad (2016) is a notorious example but is far from the only DC
   movie with this issue. Selina Kyle in The Dark Knight Rises (2012) is a
   compelling character, but as writer Janice Loreck puts it, “is still
   clearly there to be looked at.” Wonder Woman and the Amazons in Justice
   League (2017) are shot in a very different way than they are in Wonder
   Woman (2017) and are garbed in what appear to be metal bikinis.

   Sounds familiar.
   Press enter or click to view image in full size
   Return of the Jedi (1983)

   Beyond that we have the entirety of the Transformers, James Bond — yes,
   even the masterpiece that is Casino Royale (2006) — and Fast and
   Furious franchises. Star Trek, as much as I love it, repeatedly follows
   this pattern. Nearly every Tom Cruise, Michael Bay, and Tarantino movie
   is packed with objectified women. Pirates of the Caribbean, Resident
   Evil, Underworld…you get the idea.

   Then we get into standalone films.

   The Wolf of Wallstreet (2013), Jumanji: Welcome to the Jungle (2019),
   Hall Pass (2011), Silver Linings Playbook (2007), Animal House (1978),
   The Social Network (2011), 500 Days of Summer (2006), Red Sparrow
   (2019), Passangers (2016), Jurassic World (2015), Grease (1978), Kick
   Ass (2010).

   Oh, and don’t even get me started on the male gaze in horror. I swear
   if I have to watch one more woman get sexually assaulted and tortured
   to give the man something to be angry about I’m going to lose it.
   Press enter or click to view image in full size
   Irréversable (2002)

   If you doubt me, do me a favor and rewatch some of these movies. Notice
   the way women are shot and compare it to the men. Notice the
   differences in costume, in the size of their speaking roles. Ask
   yourself if these female characters would even exist if not to benefit
   the male protagonist.

   And the thing is, I don’t think the male gaze is present in the
   objectification of women on screen alone. We also see it in the way men
   are portrayed.

   The majority of the leading men in action movies are, in academic
   terms, beefcakes. Rippling muscles, zero percent body fat, and a hot
   girl on their arm at all times.

   You could make the argument that shirtless scenes with Thor are present
   for heterosexual female audiences, and you might be right. However, I
   would posit that this is not the female gaze at play, but the male.
   Press enter or click to view image in full size
   Age of Ultron (2012)

   When the male gaze is directed at female characters, the male audience
   gets to imagine themselves getting the girl. But when the male gaze is
   cast on the male protagonist, it becomes not about the desire to have,
   but the desire to be. The archetypal male hero is thus not a female
   fantasy, but a male one. It is who Hollywood tells men they ought to
   want to be.

   This is not only toxic as most men will never be able to replicate this
   body type, but it is also terribly ironic. They are essentially being
   told “look this way and you will get the girl” when in reality, most
   people I know who are attracted to men are not looking for a hulked-out
   gym bro. A lot of us prefer skinny guys, or dad bods, or women.

   Which leads us to the female gaze.
   Press enter or click to view image in full size
   The Miseducation of Cameron Post (2018)

   The female gaze is not easily defined. After all, it is still a
   relatively new concept. It was only in the 70s that the idea of the
   female gaze came into existence as a subversion of its counterpart.
   Furthermore, these are broad concepts that do not always take into
   account things like race, sexuality, and the experiences of transgender
   and nonbinary people.

   That said, there are signs of the female gaze that crop up in film time
   and time again.

   As director Ashley Connor puts it, “the ‘female gaze’ is more a frame
   of mind, where the approach to subject material is more emotional and
   respectful…”

   It is not only free of slow pans over the ass, gunslingers in bikini
   armor, and love interests killed off to catapult the male protagonist
   into heroism. The female gaze is blooming with empathy and intimacy. It
   can be brutal but does not make itself so to sate a thirst for
   violence. It shows women, and characters of all genders, as real
   people.
   Press enter or click to view image in full size
   Snowpiercer (2013)

   But by this logic, would Inside (2021), Moonlight (2016), and
   Snowpiercer (2013) — all films directed by men — not be considered the
   female gaze as well? Are they not thoughtful pieces? Are they not free
   of hypersexualized women with the personality of a cardboard box?

   In my opinion, no.

   The male gaze is rooted in stereotypes. It is not saying “all men make
   films that objectify women,” it is saying “enough men make films like
   this that it has become a pattern worthy of disruption.”

   And remember, this is about more than just costumes and characters. Of
   the top 100 grossing films of 2019, only 10% were directed by women,
   only 19% were written by women, and most of those women were white.

   Birds of Prey (2020) is an excellent example of the female gaze in
   action, especially when juxtaposed with its predecessor Suicide Squad.

   In Suicide Squad, antihero Harley Quinn is, like her infamous baseball
   bat, a prop. She is present to be ogled by men on and off-screen, and
   she is. Skip to 3:50 if you want to see what I mean, but if you’d
   rather not, I think this still of Harley in her “battle gear” will
   suffice.
   Press enter or click to view image in full size
   Suicide Squad (2016)

   The problem with her characterization goes far beyond her costume,
   though. Harley is a complicated character with a troubled past, and in
   Suicide Squad she is reduced to her body and a few quirky comments.
   Because, you know, she’s quirky.

   She’s not like other girls.

   Birds of Prey, on the other hand, portrays Harley as she truly is:
   deeply flawed, uproariously funny, queer, morally gray, lonely, and at
   the bottom of her heart a total softie.

   Her costumes, too, reflect the fullness of her character. They are bold
   and beautiful, just like her. Most importantly, the only fantasy they
   are designed to fulfill is the one Harley creates for herself.

   The other female characters in Birds of Prey are equally rich, not to
   mention diverse. Their costumes match their occupations — we first meet
   Dinah, a singer at a club, in an elegant gown and Huntress, an
   assassin, in body armor.

   Most of the dialogue between the members of the antiheroine squad that
   forms in the movie passes the Bechdel Test with flying colors, and they
   ultimately realize the only protection they have from their enemies is
   each other.
   Press enter or click to view image in full size
   Birds of Prey (2020)

   Birds of Prey is lead by women who feel at once fantastical and
   viscerally real, and my feeling watching this movie for the first time
   was oh, this is what it feels like.

   This is a feeling I have heard many marginalized communities talk about
   in recent years as positive representation slowly creeps into film, and
   as happy as I am this is happening, it is still a drop in the bucket.
   Women, particularly women of color, are still wildly underrepresented
   and misrepresented in Hollywood.
   Press enter or click to view image in full size
   Portrait of a Lady on Fire (2019)

   So, what do we do about it?

   Well, I am not asking you to burn and disavow every movie that has ever
   objectified a woman, except maybe Transformers. In this house, we hate
   Michael Bay.

   You’re allowed to love and consume “problematic” content.

   Perhaps a more realistic approach is to be willing to critique said
   content, hold its creators accountable, and support women in film — all
   women.
   Film
   The Male Gaze
   Feminism
   Marvel
   Movies

   --

   --
   (BUTTON)

   2
   (BUTTON)
   sophia slade
   sophia slade

Written by sophia slade

   24 followers
   ·1 following

   author | zillenial | emo softie | she/her | also known as
   theneonvulture

Responses (2)

   (BUTTON) See all responses

   Help

   Status

   About

   Careers

   Press

   Blog

   Privacy

   Rules

   Terms

   Text to speech
