   #My Site - RSS

   top of page

   Untitled design (1)_edited.png

     * Home!
     * Listen Now!
     * Schedule!
     * Blogs!
     * Podcasts!
     * Our Staff!
     * Events!
     * About Us!
     * more!

   Use tab to navigate through the menu items.

   Blog! Blog! Blog!

     * All Posts
     * Life & Style
     * Entertainment
     * Events
     * Life & Style
     * Movies
     * Music
     * News
     * Opinion
     * Reviews
     * Albums
     * Books
     * Comedy
     * Concerts
     * Discussion
     * DJ
     * Fashion
     * Interviews
     * Live Music
     * Lyrical Narrative
     * Nature
     * New Music
     * Poetry
     * Sports
     * TV
     * UIC Artists
     * Week of Love
     * Festivals
     * Food & Beverage
     * Politics
     * Photo

   ____________________
   Search

The Female versus The Male Gaze: A Case Study

     * Vante Duong
     * Apr 9, 2024
     * 5 min read

   (BUTTON)

   I wasn’t introduced to the concept of Female and Male Gaze until about
   2 years ago - which at first glance sounds concerning because how could
   I not know what they are if I want to write and produce films? It’s
   essential knowledge. These concepts aren’t popularized or talked about
   enough back in Vietnam - which I find obscure. Thus, I was only aware
   of it during a trend on TikTok where people see whether they’re written
   by a man or a woman, basically to see if someone’s characteristics fit
   the male or female gaze. Male authors often contribute to the male
   gaze, and female authors often contribute to the female gaze.

   I found myself wondering why it matters if you are a product of any
   gender until I realized how problematic the male gaze is. How women are
   portrayed in those products is often mischaracterized and falls into
   stereotypes. It’s unfortunate, but worse is how a handful of
   Hollywood’s biggest blockbusters are victims of it.

   One of the first case studies I’d like to discuss would be female
   superheroes, more specifically, one of Marvel's most iconic - Black
   Widow. She was the first superhero I’ve ever liked - strong,
   independent, a mere mortal that can have a stance in a team full of
   Gods and people with superpowers. But most importantly, she was the
   first female member of the Avengers and instantly made history for
   little girls around the world. So tell me, why does every suit she owns
   show so much cleavage? Is she going on a fashion show or fighting
   crimes? Why is she so incredibly sexualized? In Iron Man 2, Tony Stark
   literally points at her and says, “I want one.” as if she’s for sale.
   Actress Scarlet Johansson, who plays Natasha Romanoff (Black Widow) in
   the MCU, even agrees with how hyper-sexualized this character is.
   Looking back at the first Avengers movie and Iron Man 2, I couldn’t
   believe how I missed all of the attempts at dehumanizing the character
   of this powerful woman.

   In one scene in Avengers: Age of Ultron where, the members’ after party
   got attacked, and Bruce Banner (The Hulk) jumped over a bar counter to
   avoid a hit, which resulted in him landing face-first on Natasha’s
   chest. And I get it, there’s romantic tension between these two, and
   the filmmakers are clearly trying to set them up together, but was that
   action really necessary? It doesn’t help that she was wearing a
   button-up shirt with a few unbutton to show cleavage in that scene.
   It’s quite concerning how Black Widow is portrayed distastefully, and
   it’s even worse in the comics. This undoubtedly creates a stereotype
   and illusion that every female superhero is going to have a body-tight
   suit, heels, and an overwhelming amount of skin, which is the clearest
   evidence of the male gaze in cinema. Women don’t have to present
   themselves a certain way to please a specific audience - especially not
   when their character fights crimes for a living. Men seem to enjoy such
   characters in films because I can list a handful of powerful women who
   are written just to be sexualized on screen or for diversity.
   ree
   (BUTTON)

   “One may simplify this by saying: men act and women appear,” as John
   Berger stated in his study of the masculine gaze in visual art from the
   1972 book Ways of Seeing (derived from the BBC series of the same
   name). It perfectly sums up the female characters written by men; they
   often have very bland personalities (some would even say they have none
   at all), and they contribute little to the premise of the movie.
   Unfortunately, Megan Fox is an actress who often falls into this trope.

   Her character in the Transformers franchise is just…there. She has no
   special ability; she’s gorgeous and plays the romantic interest of Shia
   LeBeouf's character, who is much more interesting and important. She’s
   dressed in a certain way to “provoke” a male audience and marketed as
   the “sex icon” for the movie, which is no doubt disturbing. I loved her
   performance in Jennifer’s Body, but again, she’s also being advertised
   as an erotic girl who “has a taste for bad boys” - taken directly from
   an official poster for the film. The “Cool Girl” monologue from Gone
   Girl is perhaps my favorite monologue in cinema, and it explains the
   male gaze so incredibly perfectly. It mentioned men’s perception of
   what a cool girl is supposed to be and how some women will change to
   fit into that perception. The male gaze is truly dangerous, considering
   how belittling some of the portrayals of women are on film - it really
   makes you wonder if this is what the filmmakers truly view women as in
   real life.

   The Female Gaze is mentioned briefly in the article “The Invention of
   'Male Gaze'” in the New Yorker, which gives the audience very
   interesting definitions and origins. However, this phrase is getting
   increasingly known, and I’d like to dive deeper into this concept as a
   direct comparison to the male gaze. An anime with the name Jujutsu
   Kaisen has gotten more attention due to the difference between the
   adaptation and the original manga. The men in the anime are drawn in a
   very appealing way, specifically to the feminine audience (muscular and
   masculine). Still, they are all appropriately clothed. Their appearance
   does not affect nor water down their personalities, like what happened
   to female characters written by men. This is a breath of fresh air,
   especially knowing how fan service in anime can be alarming due to how
   it’s normally always catered to the male audience (for example,
   unnecessary showing of provocative positions, outfits, etc).
   ree
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)

   The female gaze also introduced us to a new definition of masculinity.
   Male characters on screen aren't expected to be super buff or ripped to
   be considered attractive, they just need to be a good written character
   - the same goes for female characters. Little Women, directed by Greta
   Gerwig, is a film that best captures the female gaze. None of the women
   depicted were objectified or anything less than just appearing for a
   role. Each female character is wonderfully crafted, and they can all
   stand out on their own. The men in this film are also written
   beautifully, which goes very well with the rest of the female-leaning
   cast.

   “Women have minds and souls as well as just hearts, and they’ve got
   ambition and talent as well as just beauty, and I’m sick of people
   saying that love is all a woman is fit for.” (Little Women, 2019).
   ree
   (BUTTON)

   I think the difference between the male and female gaze is apparent.
   Movies that aim for the female gaze typically focus more on the quality
   of characters and much less on their appearance. I understand that
   there are different definitions for both of these terms, but based on
   all the media I’ve consumed - I can’t help but conclude how flawed the
   male gaze is.

   It’s unfair and frustrating to see women being objectified and
   sexualized in movies that are clearly written and directed by men. The
   female gaze does female characters justice, giving them more life and
   displaying them as actual human beings, not to mention also writing
   male characters in a way that completely differs from the norm and
   changes the definition of masculinity. I hope to see more
   female-gaze-centric products in the future and much fewer male-gaze
   films.

   Tags:

     * analysis
     * The Good the Bad and the Films

     * Opinion
     * Movies
     * Entertainment

   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)



Recent Posts

   See All

   Can Single-Celled Life Forms Pray? A look into the First Broadway
   Performance of Andrew Lloyd Webber's "Jesus Christ Superstar"

   Can Single-Celled Life Forms Pray? A look into the First Broadway
   Performance of Andrew Lloyd Webber's "Jesus Christ Superstar"




   Hot Take: Aang and Katara should have never been together! :(

   Hot Take: Aang and Katara should have never been together! :(




   The worst Animal Farm adaptation.

   The worst Animal Farm adaptation.




   Center for Student Involvement

   About

   Contact

   U I C  R A D I O

   W H E R E

   M U S I C

   A N D  C U L T U R E

   I G N I T E

   Call Us

   312-413-2191

   Instagram

   Facebook

   Twitter
   bottom of page
