   Skip to content
   StudioBinder
   Search
   (BUTTON)
     * Features (BUTTON) Open menu
          + Call Sheet Builder
          + Screenwriting
          + AV Scripts
          + Shot Lists
          + Storyboards
          + Mood Boards
          + Script Breakdowns
          + Shooting Schedules
          + Script Sides
          + Production Contacts
          + Task Boards
          + Production Calendar
          + File Sharing
     * Customers (BUTTON) Open menu
          + Schools & Universities
          + Enterprise
          + Filmmakers
          + Photographers
          + New Media & Corporate
     * Blog (BUTTON) Open menu
          + All
          + Directing
          + Producing
          + Scriptwriting
          + Post-Production
          + Product
     * Pricing
     * Login
     * Sign Up Free

   type in your search and press enter
   ____________________
   What is the Male Gaze Definition and Examples in Film - StudioBinder
   What is the Male Gaze Definition and Examples in Film - StudioBinder
     * Film Theory

What is the Male Gaze? Definition and Examples in Film

   By Kim Leonard on April 25, 2021

   Whenever you hear someone talking about the male gaze, you may be
   asking yourself, “What is the male gaze?” Well, in this post we’re
   going to tell you. We’re going to explain what we mean by the term “the
   male gaze” and we’ll show you some examples from recent films. We’ll
   also give you some suggestions for how you can subvert the male gaze
   and create a more balanced visual narrative.

Theory

Where did the male gaze come from?

   What is the male gaze? Filmmaker and theorist Laura Mulvey first coined
   the term “the male gaze” in her seminal 1973 paper Visual Pleasure and
   Narrative Cinema. Mulvey’s essay, published two years later in Screen
   magazine, was written for an academic audience so it can be a little
   difficult to understand.

   Let’s try to break down her main points, one by one.

THE MALE GAZE

   “In a world ordered by sexual imbalance, pleasure in looking has been
   split between active/male and passive/female.”

   First of all, Mulvey was talking about how our society is structured
   by, and for the benefit of heterosexual men (i.e., “the Patriarchy”).
   Men are considered the “active” do-ers of the world, while women are
   expected to take a more “passive” role supporting the men and/or men’s
   goals.

   In the context of cinema, it’s mostly men who write the films we watch,
   mostly men who make those films, and it is men who are usually the
   target audience.

   Therefore, men are usually given the lead in the stories themselves
   while female characters are assigned functions that are limited to
   serving the goals of those male protagonists.

   Remember, Mulvey was writing an academic paper for an academic
   audience. So, when she talks about “pleasure in looking,” she’s
   referring to the notion (taken from psychology) that part of why we
   love movies is because we enjoy watching people without being seen
   ourselves.

   While we may or may not agree with that idea, it’s important to
   understand for getting into Mulvey’s next point.

THE MALE GAZE

   “The determining male gaze projects its fantasy onto the female figure…
   with [her] appearance coded for strong visual and erotic impact.”

   “The determining male gaze” is what happens when we put it all
   together.

   Men writing the films, men making the films, men being the
   protagonists, and men being the target audience all combine into a
   unified — heterosexual male — perspective of female characters.

   In other words, we all been conditioned to adopt the male gaze because
   that is the way we were “raised” by traditional cinema.

THE MALE GAZE

   “Traditionally, the woman displayed has functioned on two levels: as
   erotic object for the characters within the screen story, and as erotic
   object for the spectator within the [cinema] auditorium.”

   Female characters must perform their story function while also adhering
   to the heterosexual male sexual fantasy — though not always in a
   literal way. Simply being beautiful (or “sexy”) is all that’s needed.

   Let’s clarify with an example. In the following scene from Fast Five,
   Gisele (Gal Gadot) and Han (Sung Kang) have been tasked with getting
   the bad guy’s fingerprints.

   This scene is a perfect illustration of what each aspect of Laura
   Mulvey’s male gaze looks like in practice.

   Notice how the very first thing Gisele does to accomplish her part of
   the mission is strip down to her bikini. Next, the camera shifts to
   super sexy slo-mo to catch each tiny movement Gisele’s body makes —
   which gives us time to notice that many of the other women in the frame
   are just as scantily clothed.

A Woman's Job  •  Fast Five

   Because this is Han’s point of view, the camera lingers on Gisele’s
   every move from a slight distance. But ultimately, we punch in on her
   bum because that’s where the bad guy puts his hand — which is what
   Gisele wants to happen.

   We accept all this because we know Gisele is in on the whole thing —
   that it’s her idea, even. But in fact, the character of Gisele is being
   used to achieve something the male protagonist needs.

   Now that we have a sense of what to look for, let’s practice being able
   to recognize the male gaze.

Practice

Recognize the male gaze

   We know that the male gaze objectifies female characters. But more
   importantly, the male gaze also reaffirms the power of the Patriarchy
   to use women as props in service of the heterosexual male narrative.
   What is the Male Gaze - Mulvey Quotes Director Budd Boetticher What is
   the Male Gaze - Mulvey Quotes Director Budd Boetticher

Mulvey quotes director Budd Boetticher

   In other words, a female character doesn’t have to be overly sexualized
   to be the object of the male gaze, Mulvey explains. What matters is
   that she incites (passive) the male protagonist to take action (active)
   toward his ultimate goal.

   Mulvey wrote her essay some 50 years ago, so she was mostly referring
   to the Classical era of mainstream cinema. Let’s look at an example
   that fits Mulvey’s references a little better.

   Aladdin is a traditional family film that was released in 2019. Though
   21st century Jasmine has her own goals and stands up for herself
   throughout the film, she is still objectified by the story and every
   man in it.

Princess Jasmine  •  Aladdin

   To her Sultan father, Jasmine (Naomi Scott) is a precious artifact
   locked away for safekeeping. To the villain Jafar (Marwan Kenzari),
   Jasmine is a valuable commodity to be obtained for greater power and
   influence.

   And to Aladdin (Mena Massoud), the hero, Jasmine is a prize to be won.
   Which he ultimately does, with the help of his trusty sidekick, Genie
   (Will Smith).

   The other element of the male gaze we need to talk about is the camera
   itself. Where we place the camera, and what we include in the frame
   (camera framing), is just as important to how we view female characters
   as the way they are written in the screenplay.

   Bombshell recounts the story of how multiple female on-air talent at
   Fox News came forward to disclose how they had been sexually harassed
   (or worse) by sexual predator Roger Ailes (John Lithgow).

Bombshell  •  Kayla's "Audtition"

   Notice that, rather than placing the camera so the audience identifies
   with Kayla (Margot Robbie), the woman being victimized, the director’s
   choice of camera placement — and particularly of framing — has us
   identifying with the sexual predator instead. In his analysis of
   "Bombshell," Jay Roach provided unique insights into the challenges of
   portraying real-life events on the big screen.

   And let’s compare these scenes from two different James Bond films.

   In Die Another Day, Halle Berry’s “Jinx” is objectified by both James
   Bond (Pierce Brosnan) and the camera in the same way as Gisele in Fast
   Five, including the sexy slo-mo.

Jinx Scene  •  Die Another Day

   But when Bond himself emerges from the water in Casino Royale, there’s
   no slo-mo, no binoculars. In fact, the cross cutting between Bond
   (Daniel Craig) and the woman with the horse (Catarina Murino) tells us
   that they make eye contact, not that she’s ogling his body.

   Okay, so now that we know what the male gaze looks like, even when it’s
   not overtly sexual, what can we do to switch things up?

Innovate

Subvert the male gaze

   We subvert something by taking away its power, especially in the
   context of a long-accepted social construct, like the Patriarchy. With
   this in mind, how can we subvert the male gaze in our filmmaking
   choices?

   One way is to draw attention to it; and a good way to do that is by
   swapping genders. Take a role a woman always plays and cast a man
   instead.
   What is the Male Gaze - Marllyn Monroe The Archetypical Bimbo What is
   the Male Gaze - Marllyn Monroe The Archetypical Bimbo

Marilyn Monroe  •  The Archetypical Bimbo

   For example, the Bimbo is a character women have been playing since
   films first had sound. What the Bimbo lacks in intellect is more than
   balanced out by her physical attractiveness.

   But unless she’s Marilyn Monroe, who made an entire career playing this
   character, the Bimbo usually has very little function in the overall
   plot.

   She is sometimes the “love interest” (i.e., lusted after) for one of
   the male characters, but her main purpose in the story is eye candy for
   the male audience members.

   Ghostbusters subverts the male gaze by casting Chris Hemsworth to play
   the Bimbo instead. Hemsworth’s Kevin Beckman is the only male of the
   group, is lusted after by Erin (Kristen Wiig), and he’s dumber than a
   box of rocks.

The Receptionist  •  Ghostbusters

   Kevin also gets possessed in the final act of the film by the (dead)
   bad guy, Rowan — which is still very much a part of the usual male gaze
   tropes. Doing something to the “love interest” is a standard plot point
   that draws out the hero to the final confrontation.

Kevin Possessed  •  Ghostbusters

   In other words, Rowan possesses Kevin, not because of anything Kevin
   personally says or does, but because it’s a way to attack the
   Ghostbusters and force them into the final battle sequence.

   As an added bonus, Rowan also revels in the experience of what it’s
   like to be physically strong and attractive.

TROPE DEFINITION

WHAT IS A TROPE?

   A trope is a story element (character, plot point, etc) that is so
   common, it’s immediately recognizable. Similar to a cliché, but not
   necessarily with the same negative connotations.

   Jumanji: Welcome to the Jungle also does a good job of subverting the
   male gaze. In this story, a group of high schoolers are magically
   sucked into a video game where they appear as their game avatars.

   This means casting adult actors to play teenagers. Jack Black plays the
   avatar (“Shelly Oberon”) chosen by Bethany (Madison Iseman).

Bethany Learns to Pee  •  Jumanji

   In general, Jumanji: Welcome to the Jungle calls out many of the tropes
   common in video games, not the least of which is how the male avatars
   are all fully covered while Martha’s avatar, Ruby Roundhouse (Karen
   Gillan), is wearing only a crop top and skimpy shorts.

   In the following scene Martha is sent to distract the male guards so
   her friends can sneak into the aircraft hangar. They watch her from a
   distance waiting for their chance.

Martha's Sexy Dance Fighting  •  Jumanji

   This scene subverts the male gaze on multiple fronts. First, because
   the teenage Martha has no idea or experience of how to be “sexy.” So
   she does her best to imitate the tropes we’ve already discussed.

   Meanwhile, the camera simulates watching her through binoculars, giving
   us her friends’ perspective in the same way we saw earlier in Die
   Another Day. But unlike Bond, Martha’s friends are not titillated by
   her body in the slightest.

   In fact, they express concern for her well-being. What’s more, the
   “non-player character” guards are totally ignorant of the male gaze and
   so are incapable of even understanding what Martha is doing.

Conclusion

Remember these things

   So, let’s recap. The main thing to remember about Laura Mulvey’s male
   gaze is that it’s the perspective of the heterosexual male fantasy.

   In writing, the male is the strong, confident protagonist and the
   female characters are there to serve his story. Female characters can
   be overly sexualized objects of desire, or simply there to tend to his
   wounds and support him in reaching his goal.

   In filming, the male gaze is represented by the camera. It lingers over
   the female body in ways meant to titillate both the male protagonist
   and the audience. It frames the female body in sections and dehumanizes
   her.

UP NEXT

How to avoid stereotypes in movies

   The same way the male gaze promotes a certain ideology about females
   characters, other stereotypes also persist. Let's briefly go over the
   stereotypes that the film industry has perpetuated along with some
   films and TV shows that are redefining the cultural landscape.

                                            Up Next: Avoiding stereotypes →

   Solution Icon - Shot List and Storyboard Solution Icon - Shot List and
   Storyboard

Share your vision with elegant shot lists and storyboards.

   Create robust and customizable shot lists. Upload images to make
   storyboards and slideshows.

   Learn ﻿Mo﻿re﻿﻿ ➜
   Get Started for Free
   play button purple play button purple
   Tags: Aladdin, Bombshell, Die Another Day, Fast and Furious,
   Ghostbusters, Jumanji
     * Kim Leonard
       Kim Leonard is a writer and director who specializes in Comedy. She
       has done just about every job on set, from PA to Producer.

   [FrcCs0KvOrccuEQA7]

Post navigation

   Previous Post

   Tenet Script PDF Download: Plot, Characters, and Analysis

   Next Post

   How to Write an Adaptation — Script Development Explained
   StudioBinder - Cloudbased Production Management Software for Film, TV
   and Video Creatives About
     * Blog
     * Support
     * Tutorials
     * Templates
     * Press
     * Terms
     * Privacy

   Learn More
     * Pricing & Plans
     * Featured On
     * Careers
     * StudioBinder Partners
     * Contact

   Featured Blog Posts
     * Ultimate Guide to Call Sheets
     * How to Break Down a Script (with FREE Script Breakdown Sheet)
     * The Only Shot List Template You Need — with Free Download
     * Managing Your Film Budget Cashflow & PO Log (Free Template)
     * A Better Film Crew List Template Booking Sheet
     * Best Storyboard Softwares (with free Storyboard Templates)

   Compare
     * Movie Magic Scheduling
     * Gorilla Software
     * Storyboard That
     * Celtx

   FREE Master Classes
     * Advanced Filmmaking Techniques
       A visual medium requires visual methods. Master the art of visual
       storytelling with our FREE video series on directing and filmmaking
       techniques.
     * TV Writing and Development
       We’re in a golden age of TV writing and development. More and more
       people are flocking to the small screen to find daily
       entertainment. So how can you break put from the pack and get your
       idea onto the small screen? We’re here to help.
     * Making It: From Pre-Production to Screen

   Latest
     * Best Cinematography Techniques and Tips You Didn’t Learn in Film
       School
     * A Beginner’s Guide to Cinematography Techniques
     * What is Cinematography? Defining the Art and Craft
     * How to Make a Music Video Storyboard: A Step-by-Step Guide
     * 46 Storyboard Examples from Movies, Animation, and Games (with FREE
       Storyboard Templates)

   Made by Leanometry
   ©2025 STUDIOBINDER INC.
   111 Shares
     * 84 Facebook
     * 6 Pinterest
     * 0 Reddit
     * 21 LinkedIn
     * 0 Twitter

   111 Shares
     * 84
     * 6
     * 0
     * 21
     * 0

   Copy link
   https://www.studiobi CopyCopied

   StudioBinder
   (BUTTON)
     * Directing (BUTTON) Open menu
          + Auteur Directors
          + Cinematography
          + Film Theory
          + Movies
          + Video Gear
     * Producing (BUTTON) Open menu
          + Breakdowns
          + Budgeting
          + Development
          + Distribution
          + Marketing
          + Production Hacks
          + Scheduling
     * Scriptwriting (BUTTON) Open menu
          + Brainstorming
          + Writing
     * Post-Production (BUTTON) Open menu
          + Motion Graphics
          + Music & Sound Effects
          + Editing Techniques
          + Video Effects
     * Resources (BUTTON) Open menu
          + Books and Guides
          + Video Courses
          + Filmmaking Templates
          + Product Video Tutorials
          + Careers at StudioBinder
          + Support Desk
     * Menu Item
