   Skip to Main content

   Elsevier logo
     * Journals & Books

     * (BUTTON) Help
     * Search

   My account
   Sign in
   (BUTTON)

Gaze

   In subject area: Immunology and Microbiology

   Gaze refers to the position of the eyes when focused on a specific
   point in the environment, which can deviate due to conditions such as
   strabismus, where the globe's alignment is affected by various
   neurological or muscular abnormalities.

   AI generated definition based on: Small Animal Ophthalmology (Fourth
   Edition), 2009

   How useful is this definition?
   (BUTTON) Press Enter to select rating, 1 out of 3 stars (BUTTON) Press
   Enter to select rating, 2 out of 3 stars (BUTTON) Press Enter to select
   rating, 3 out of 3 stars
   (BUTTON) About this page
   (BUTTON) Set alert

Also in subject area:

     * Biochemistry, Genetics and Molecular Biology

   Discover more topics
    1. (BUTTON)

On this page

   (BUTTON)

On this page

     * Definition
     * Chapters and Articles
     * Related Terms
     * Recommended Publications

On this page

     * Definition
     * Chapters and Articles
     * Related Terms
     * Recommended Publications

Chapters and Articles

   You might find these chapters and articles relevant to this topic.

   Chapter

Sentence Processing: Issues and Measures

   2000, Reading as a Perceptual ProcessWayne S. Murray

Gaze

   The term ‘gaze’ has been defined as the summed duration of all
   fixations falling within a defined region, until the eye exits that
   region (in any direction). However, this term is normally only used in
   reading research when the region constitutes a single word. When the
   region is comprised of a number of words, this measure is frequently,
   and I will argue inappropriately, referred to as ‘first pass reading
   time’ (e.g., Rayner, Sereno, Morris, Schmauder and Clifton, 1989).
   Clifton et al. and Konieczny and Hemforth use that terminology here,
   while Frenck-Mestre and Pynte adopt the hybrid ‘first pass gaze
   duration’.

   Why do I argue that this is inappropriate? Well, for starters, why
   (confusingly) use two terms to refer to the same measure? The answer I
   will suggest lies in two questionable assumptions, both of which are
   related to processing. The first of these is that the term ‘gaze’
   somehow relates to apperception. Thus, the amount of time spent looking
   at a word, or indeed any object, is assumed to be related to the time
   taken to identify it. One might achieve this with a single fixation, or
   with a somewhat larger or more difficult ‘object’ it may take a number
   of fixations probably directed to different parts of the object. The
   assumption, however, is that the object is likely to be inspected for
   just enough time to identify it, before the eye moves on. Total
   inspection time is assumed to be closely related to total
   identification time. (I will ignore the question raised by Inhoff and
   Radach of whether we should also be including saccade time in this
   measure, since, as they point out, it will probably make relatively
   little difference in the majority of instances.)

   What makes this assumption questionable is, of course, the nature of
   that elastic coupling between the eye and the mind, with parafoveal and
   ‘spillover’ effects. Nonetheless, it does seem like a reasonable
   approximation, and if one includes instances with zero gaze (i.e.,
   cases of word skipping) in the calculation of averages, then average
   gaze should be reasonably well related to average identification
   difficulty. I suspect the suggestion that we adopt a principle of
   including zeros in the calculation is likely to be controversial, but
   as far as I can see, it readily falls out of the above assumptions.

   It might reasonably be suggested that this is crazy, since when a word
   is not fixated we don’t know that it is in fact being identified. My
   response is that we don’t know that when a word is inspected that it is
   being identified. We have good grounds for assuming that this is
   generally true, but know nothing of any specific instance. Similarly,
   we have good grounds for believing that most cases of word skipping
   involve the parafoveal identification of the word. Certainly, this is
   not identification in zero time, but the time required is included in
   the gaze on the previous word. Well, not quite — that gaze probably
   reflected less than the full time to identify that word (since there is
   likely to have been some parafoveal preview advantage there too). Thus,
   gaze duration in instances in which a word is inspected (assuming that
   some words are not) is likely to be an overestimate of identification
   time for the word. However, the average time, provided we include those
   zeros, is likely to be a pretty good estimate of the average
   identification time. Indeed, there is empirical evidence which suggests
   that the inclusion of zeros results in a measure more sensitive to
   processing load (Blanchard, 1985). The only systematic source of
   contamination will relate to the extent to which the mind may lag
   behind (or perhaps be ahead of) the eye.

   In contrast, consider the consequences of ignoring zeros. Let’s assume
   a concrete example of the two word string ‘despite a’. Let’s assume
   that in our sample of recordings ‘despite’ always attracts at least one
   fixation and has an average gaze duration of 265 ms. The word ‘a’, on
   the other hand only attracts fixations on 33% of occasions, but when it
   does, the average duration is 252 ms. Do we assume that 252 ms is a
   good estimate of identification time for ‘a’? I suspect most would
   agree that the calculation including zeros (84 ms) is likely to be
   closer to the mark. The point is that if it’s possible to identify a
   word without looking at it, calculation including only those cases
   where a fixation falls directly on the word is sure to provide a biased
   estimate and the extent of the bias will be directly related to the
   probability of skipping.

   If you are still not convinced, perhaps one further calculation will do
   it. In the above example, assuming no regressions, average gaze on the
   string ‘despite a’ was 349 ms. How could this be made up of two
   ‘sub-gazes’ of 265 and 252 ms?

   This brings us to the second assumption: If the gaze on a single word
   reflects time to identify it, then taking gaze on a string of words
   will reflect the time taken to process them. Seeing that this is an
   apperceptive process, we can consequently call it ‘first pass reading
   time’, on the assumption that first pass reflects the initial low level
   processing of that string — although in this case we are probably also
   assuming a bit of syntactic processing in addition to the word
   identifications. Again, with the caveats regarding a bit of elasticity
   in the system and the inclusion of zeros etc., this works fine,
   provided we assume that this reflects the apperception of the ‘object’
   as a whole. However, this really isn’t the case with a multi-word
   string — it normally isn’t a single ‘object’.

   Liversedge et al. (1998) provide a number of interesting examples of
   what a reader might do in such circumstances, especially if this string
   poses some processing difficulty. However, the general principle is
   straightforward. Where the region consists of a number of ‘objects’,
   there is rather less certainty that the processing of all those objects
   will be completed before the eye leaves that region, than if only one
   object is involved. To take a concrete example, if the region were the
   string ‘behind the fridge’ and the eye landed on ‘behind’ and then
   immediately regressed to some previous words, would we assume that the
   duration of this fixation reflected the apperception of the entire
   string? I suspect not. We would probably be even less inclined to do so
   if, after regressing, the eye returned to inspect the word ‘fridge’
   before moving on.

   It is an open question as to what might constitute ‘first pass reading
   time’ in this instance. If we mean by that: the time to identify each
   of the words, then arguably it might be captured by something like the
   accumulated gaze on each of the three individual words. But of course
   that isn’t normally what we mean. What we are usually trying to get at
   (at least in sentence parsing research) is some measure of immediate
   processing difficulty — lexical and syntactic and perhaps semantic. We
   assume that an ‘early’ measure, like gaze, will capture this better
   than later measures, such as total reading time (the sum of all
   fixations falling within a defined region). But while it’s certainly
   true that gaze is an early measure, there is no guarantee that it will
   be a complete measure. Even ignoring the question of what prompted the
   regression in the example above, and whether this is in fact something
   that we wish to capture with our ‘first pass’ measure, it seems clear
   that the measure potentially fails to capture even the most basic
   identification process for part of the string. As Liversedge et al.
   aptly demonstrate, shorter gaze does not necessarily map onto decreased
   processing difficulty. In fact, it can easily mean the opposite. If all
   subjects in a ‘difficult’ condition immediately regressed after
   inspecting ‘behind’, in our example, and those in an ‘easy’ condition
   did not, then gaze would be shorter in the difficult condition.

   The point is that ‘gaze’ seems to be an appropriate measure for the
   processing of an ‘object’ — normally in reading, but I suppose not
   necessarily, a single word. To the extent that the region being
   considered acts as more than one functional object, the measure becomes
   increasingly inappropriate. Changing the name does nothing to
   ameliorate this difficulty and, in fact, in this instance leads to a
   misapprehension. ‘First pass reading time’ effects have become
   something of a prerequisite for various sorts of parsing claims, but in
   fact it’s not even clear what is meant by the term. Perhaps accumulated
   word gaze would come close, or perhaps accumulated progressive fixation
   duration, but both measures bring their own complications and I suspect
   they do not get at what the majority of sentence parsing researchers
   really mean by ‘first pass reading time’. But one thing seems clear. It
   should not be confused with multi-word gaze. This seems to be a measure
   fraught with difficulty: it is not monotonically related to processing
   difficulty and cannot even be relied on to include the initial
   perceptual processing of the words in the string.
   (BUTTON) Show more
   View chapterExplore book
   Read full chapter
   URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B978008043642550
   0309
   Book
   Reading as a Perceptual Process
   2000, Reading as a Perceptual Process
   Wayne S. Murray

   Chapter

Nonverbal Communication

   2016, Encyclopedia of Mental Health (Second Edition)U. Hess

Gaze

   Gaze direction is something not usually thought to be part of the
   emotional expression itself (e.g., Ellsworth and Ross, 1975; Fehr and
   Exline, 1987). Indeed, the faces employed in nearly all expression
   decoding studies have used stimuli where the expresser’s gaze is
   directed at the perceiver. The general argument made concerning the
   effect of direct gaze is that it plays an important role in the
   perception of the intensity of the emotion but not in the perception of
   its quality (e.g., Argyle and Cook, 1976; Kleinke, 1986; Webbink,
   1986). An obvious reason this might be the case is that direct gaze
   signals that the perceiver is the object of whatever emotion is being
   displayed by the expresser and thus captivates attentional resources
   (Cary, 1978; Ellsworth and Ross, 1975; Grumet, 1999; Macrae et al.,
   2002). By contrast, research by Adams and his colleagues (Adams et al.,
   2003; Adams and Kleck, 2003, 2005) support the shared signal
   hypothesis, demonstrating that the gaze direction of the expresser can
   affect the efficiency with which a given display is processed as well
   as determine the quality of the emotion that will be perceived in a
   blended or ambiguous expression. They argue that when different facial
   cues such as the specific expression and the direction of gaze share
   the same signal value (e.g., approach or avoidance) the shared signal
   facilitates overall processing efficiency. Others have reported
   evidence supporting perceptual integration in the processing of these
   cues. These studies also demonstrate that when gaze and emotion are not
   of relatively equal discriminability, direct gaze effects do occur
   (e.g., Graham and LaBar, 2007). Thus, gaze direction appears to not
   only influence emotion perception but to do so through the processes of
   direct perceptual integration and indirect attention capture.
   (BUTTON) Show more
   View chapterExplore book
   Read full chapter
   URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B978012397045900
   2184
   Reference work
   Encyclopedia of Mental Health (Second Edition)
   2016, Encyclopedia of Mental Health (Second Edition)
   U. Hess

   Chapter

Eye Movement Research

   1995, Studies in Visual Information ProcessingJ.N. Vickers

Gaze control in foul shooting

   Schmid & Zambarbieri (1991, p. 229) define gaze as “the absolute
   position of the eyes in space and depends on both eye position in orbit
   and head position in space.” According to their model, sensory
   information is received from the environment, with a voluntary
   generating of commands that direct the gaze according to the goals and
   intentions of the subject. At the lower levels, the head, body, and
   oculomotor control systems act as one closely coupled system
   (Zangemeister & Stark, 1982; Guitton & Voile, 1987). In basketball foul
   shooting, performers develop a fluid shooting motion, one in which the
   eyes, head, arms and body work together as one coordinated unit. When a
   subject orients his or her gaze to a target, such as the hoop in
   basketball, the most common movement of the eyes is a sequence of
   events in which the eyes move prior to the head (Zangemeister & Stark,
   1982; Guitton & Voile, 1987; Gauthier et al, 1991; Schmid &
   Zambarbieri, 1991). Gauthier et al (1991) explain that the head follows
   because of its greater inertia, with the eyes localizing the target
   first and visual discrimination beginning immediately and maintained
   steadily on the target even though the head is moving. The movement of
   eyes and head to the target is normally smooth, with the processing of
   information occurring as soon as the eyes stabilize on the target. Gaze
   control in basketball foul shooting is therefore defined as the manner
   is which a performer moves the head and eyes to take in available
   information while preparing and executing the shot. Gaze control in the
   study reported here was specified by the percentage of trials in which
   a gaze was used, as well as the mean frequency and duration of gaze
   across the temporal phases of the movement.

   Research in eye movements and gaze control currently supports two views
   of the role of visual search in physical performance. Abemethy &
   Russell (1987), Abemethy (1990), Goulet, Bard & Fleury (1989), Helsen &
   Pauwels (1990) have found that when expert and novice athletes watch
   video representations of sport problems and are asked to select a best
   answer from available choices, their eye movements are not an indicator
   of the decisions made. Abemethy (1990, p. 63) has concluded that
   differences between expert and novice performers is not due to “an
   inappropriate search strategy but rather an inability to make full use
   of the information available from fixated display features.” This
   conclusion is not supported by research where the visual behavior of
   subjects is monitored as they perform physical skills (Ripoll, Papin,
   Guezennec, Verdy, & Philip, 1985; Ripoll, Bard & Paillard, 1986;
   Vickers, 1992; Helsen & Pauwels, 1993). In pistol shooting, Ripoll et
   al (1985) found that expert and near-experts shooters differ in how
   they sight and track the gun to the target. In basketball shooting,
   Ripoll et al (1986) found that E shooters orient their gaze to the
   basket earlier and maintain head stability for longer durations than
   novices. In golf putting, Vickers (1992) found that low handicap
   golfers^1 hold their gaze fixated on the ball through the backswing,
   foreswing, and contact phases of the stroke, a behavior that
   contributed to greater accuracy. Lesser skilled golfers did not hold
   their gaze fixated, but shifted their gaze at intervals under one
   second taking in available information at a set rate irrespective of
   its form or potential function. It would appear that in research where
   subjects are required to physically perform skills, significant
   differences . in gaze have been found between skilled and lesser
   skilled performers. These differences may be centered in the multiple
   demands of controlling not only the aiming system but also the gaze and
   accompanying input of environmental information.

   In the current study expert (E) and near-expert (NE) athletes performed
   foul shots while their gaze was monitored simultaneously. An expert (E)
   was defined as one who made over 75% of their foul shots over a full
   season of play. A near-expert (NE) competed in the same environment but
   was unable to shoot above 60%. Within this highly skilled group of
   athletes it has remained a mystery why some excel in foul shooting,
   while others struggle given similar years of practice, training and
   competition. Reasons solely attributable to physical ability are
   difficult to rationalize since athletes at the upper levels of
   basketball tend to be very similar in cardiac and aerobic function
   (Hartley, 1992; Astrand, 1992), anaerobic power (McArdle, Katch &
   Katch, 1991), muscular strength and power (Komi, 1992), and body
   composition (Titel & Wutscherk, 1992; Wilmore & Costill, 1988). Because
   of the equivalence of these factors, it is important to look for other
   contributing reasons, such as the control of gaze while shooting. The E
   foul shooters were expected to use significantly fewer gaze of longer
   mean duration, while the NE would shift their gaze at higher
   frequencies and lower durations, irrespective of type of gaze behavior,
   location of gaze, or phase of the movement. The E shooters were also
   expected to hold their gaze fixated on a critical target location
   across two or more phases of the shooting movement, a form of gaze
   independence in which the eyes remain fixated on a critical location
   while the aiming movements are made.
   (BUTTON) Show more
   View chapterExplore book
   Read full chapter
   URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0926907X0580044
   3
   Book series
   1995, Studies in Visual Information Processing
   J.N. Vickers

   Chapter

Extraocular Muscles

   2012, Clinical Anatomy and Physiology of the Visual System (Third
   Edition)Lee Ann Remington OD, MS, FAAO

Positions of Gaze

   The primary position of gaze is defined as the position of the eye with
   the head erect, the eye located at the intersection of the sagittal
   plane of the head and the horizontal plane passing through the centers
   of rotation of both eyes, and the eye focused for infinity.^17
   Secondary positions of gaze are rotations around either the vertical
   axis or the horizontal axis; tertiary positions are rotations around
   both the vertical and the horizontal axes.
   (BUTTON) Show more
   View chapterExplore book
   Read full chapter
   URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B978143771926010
   0104
   Book
   Clinical Anatomy and Physiology of the Visual System (Third Edition)
   2012, Clinical Anatomy and Physiology of the Visual System (Third
   Edition)
   Lee Ann Remington OD, MS, FAAO

   Chapter

Cognition

   2016, Animal Behavior (Second Edition)Michael D. Breed, Janice Moore

Gaze Following

   As described previously, gaze following is another basic measure of an
   animal’s ability to separate self from others. Humans are very
   sensitive to gaze direction; a person can easily observe the direction
   that another person is looking and identify the object of that person’s
   attention. Human infants develop the ability to follow gazes at 6–8
   months old, much younger than their development of responses in mirror
   tests. For many years, investigators thought that only humans could
   follow gazes; newer studies demonstrate gaze following in a variety of
   primates, suggesting that, like numerical assessments, gaze following
   is deeply rooted in primate evolution. Rhesus monkeys can follow gazes
   by looking at the orientation of another monkey’s head, rather than
   focusing on the eyes. Most dog owners believe that their dogs can
   follow their gazes, but this ability has only recently been established
   scientifically for dogs;^30 studies of wolves suggest that gaze
   following may be a unique result of the domestication of dogs, along
   with artificial selection that favors dogs who can follow human
   instructions. The fact that dogs are more likely to follow a human gaze
   if the human first looks at or speaks to the dog supports the
   artificial selection hypothesis (Figure 6.9).^31,32

   Figure 6.9. Gaze following experiments may be used as evidence—albeit
   controversial—of theory of mind. These animals are looking intently at
   something, and humans can follow their gaze, but can they follow each
   other’s gazes? This is an interesting, and difficult to test, question
   in animal cognition. Likely the chimpanzee (right) can follow other
   chimpanzee’s gazes, while the hypothesis is untested in ring-tailed
   lemurs (left).
   Photos: Michael Breed (left) and John Mitani (right).

   Like mirror tests, positive results of gaze following studies can be
   interpreted to support a concept of self for an animal that follows a
   gaze; animals that do not follow a gaze may not have a theory of
   mind—the ability to project the thoughts of other animals. Returning to
   the definition of cognition presented earlier in this chapter, humans
   use gaze following to assess intent and forecast the future. But do
   other animals, even chimpanzees, use gaze in the same way? Perhaps gaze
   following is merely a functional adaptation that allows an organism to
   compete for food, spot potential predators, and perform similar simple
   and not necessarily cognitive operations. As with the mirror tests, the
   interpretation of gaze following as evidence of cognition remains
   controversial.
   (BUTTON) Show more
   View chapterExplore book
   Read full chapter
   URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B978012801532200
   0064
   Book
   Animal Behavior (Second Edition)
   2016, Animal Behavior (Second Edition)
   Michael D. Breed, Janice Moore

   Chapter

Physical examination and clinical investigation

   2011, The Consultation in PhytotherapyPeter Conway Dip Phyt MNIMH MCPP
   Cert Ed

The Varieties of the Clinical Gaze

   The clinical gaze is not that of an intellectual eye that is able to
   perceive the unalterable purity of essences beneath phenomena. It is a
   gaze of the concrete sensibility, a gaze that travels from body to
   body, and whose trajectory is situated in the space of sensible
   manifestation.

   Foucault (2007)

   The approach to physical examination – how it is to be done, what its
   findings signify – is culturally shaped. The radial pulse described by
   an ancient Chinese medicine practitioner is not the same radial pulse
   felt by the ancient Greeks and Romans. In these contrasting cases, both
   the techniques used and the conclusions drawn may differ dramatically.
   There are multiple ways in which the body can be viewed – each
   according to its own internal logic and placed within a broader
   conceptual framework or understanding of the nature of the world.

   Kuriyama (1995) explores ‘visual knowledge’ in ancient medicine, asking
   the question: ‘What is it, exactly, that the eyes can know?’ The
   predominant answer in Greek medicine has to do with ‘form’, while in
   Chinese medicine, the reply is ‘colour’, so that Kuriyama can state:

   If the eyes of the Hellenistic dissector were trained on structures,
   the Han dynasty physician fixed on hues.

   Kuriyama provides examples of the use of colour in Chinese medical
   diagnosis:

   A face tinged with yellow or red, the Neijing teaches, signals fever;
   white means cold; and green and black, pain. In fevers of the liver,
   redness first appears on the left cheek; in fevers of the lung, on the
   right cheek; in cardiac fevers, on the forehead.

   As Kuriyama points out, recourse to observing and interpreting colour
   in diagnosis is not perplexing – after all, contemporary biomedicine
   still takes notice of changes in skin colour (e.g. in jaundice, or the
   malar flush), rather: ‘What puzzles is that colours should be judged
   paramount …’. The reason for this emphasis connects with the meaning of
   colours within a grander scheme of perception and understanding,
   whereby they possess ‘cosmic as well as somatic significance’:

   Each of the five basic colours of green, red, yellow, white and black
   corresponded to one of the five phases (wuxing = wood, fire, earth,
   metal and water) of cosmic change. By observing the hues tingeing a
   patient's face, the physician could determine the phase governing the
   patient's condition. A florid countenance, for instance, bespoke the
   dominance of fire; a visage with yellowish tints, the waxing of the
   earth. Nuances of shade, differences in when and where various hues
   appeared, and the indications of other senses could add practical
   complexities; but the principle was simple: to see was to see colour,
   because the five colours linked the eye to the five-fold
   transformations pacing the cosmos.

   The way we perceive the body arises from the way we see the world,
   which derives from what we have been taught and what we believe. Herbal
   practitioners trained in the western tradition in the UK, at least,
   tend to combine a biomedical rationale for the working of the body with
   a variable range of other explanatory models such as those associated
   with notions of holism, vitalism, naturopathy, Hippocratism and with
   vestiges of specific herbal movements such as Physiomedicalism and
   Eclecticism. As regards physical examination, the tendency appears to
   be to learn conventional diagnostic examination but then to implement
   it to only a very limited extent in practice. This lack of utilization
   may be due to a number of factors, in addition to issues around the
   quality of teaching previously mentioned, such as:

   •
          Low diagnostic need (where patients have already been medically
          diagnosed)

   •
          Lack of awareness of the non-diagnostic dimensions of physical
          examination (as listed above)

   •
          Lack of a sense of congruency between conventional examination
          techniques and the practitioner's personal conception of herbal
          medicine

   •
          Substitution with alternative examination techniques that
          possess greater congruency.

   Where examination strategies have reduced to a small core the capacity
   to apply the senses to apprehend the patient is similarly diminished
   and the range of potential routes to knowing the patient is narrowed.
   This is regrettable when seen in light of the benefits that physical
   examination has to offer both practitioner and patient. One means of
   re-energizing interest in physical examination (aside from promoting a
   fuller realization of its capacities) lies in the potential for
   integrating conventional and traditional techniques. A critical
   comparison of the various types of examination used in medical
   traditions from around the world represents a fascinating project,
   implying as it does, a cross-cultural analysis that leads to the very
   roots of perception in medicine. The scope of phytotherapy is broad
   enough to engage in this task – on the one hand appreciating the
   focussing obtained by the lens of evidence-based physical diagnosis and
   on the other, learning from the expansive cosmic insights afforded by
   traditional diagnosis.
   (BUTTON) Show more
   View chapterExplore book
   Read full chapter
   URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B978044307492900
   0126
   Book
   The Consultation in Phytotherapy
   2011, The Consultation in Phytotherapy
   Peter Conway Dip Phyt MNIMH MCPP Cert Ed

   Chapter

Learning Theory and Behavior

   2017, Learning and Memory: A Comprehensive Reference (Second
   Edition)Julia Fischer

1.10.2.5 Gaze Following

   Gaze following, the tendency to direct one's attention to locations
   looked at by others, is a crucial aspect of social cognition in human
   and nonhuman primates. Following the gaze of others can guide attention
   to critical information from the environment such as food, predators,
   or social interactions. Furthermore, gaze following is thought to be
   crucial in linguistic and sociocognitive development in humans
   (Baron-Cohen, 1995; Meltzoff, 2007). There are several experimental
   studies on captive subjects showing that nonhuman primates follow the
   gaze of others (reviewed in Tomasello and Call, 2006). Whereas the
   development of gaze following has been intensely studied in human
   infants, less was known about its developmental trajectory in nonhuman
   primates. Young rhesus monkeys followed the gaze of the experimenter at
   about 6 months of age (Tomasello et al., 2001). Next to nothing was
   known about the ontogenetic development of gaze following among
   nonhuman primates. Using observational data from Barbary macaques,
   Teufel and colleagues investigated the propensity follow of the gaze
   and facial orientation of conspecifics. Gaze following was highly
   prevalent among conspecifics: In about two-thirds of the instances when
   another animal was looking into a specific direction, the subject also
   turned into that direction (Teufel et al., 2010). This gaze following
   developed within the first year of life, with a rapid increase in the
   propensity to gaze follow between 5 and 6 months (Fig. 3). Across age
   classes, gaze-following responses were significantly enhanced
   in situations in which the gaze cue was accompanied by a facial
   expression, while the sex, rank, and kin relations did not affect
   gaze-following rates. Thus, the visual orientation of others serves as
   an important cue to direct subjects' attention to specific events in
   the environment (Teufel et al., 2010).

   Figure 3. Influence of facial expressions on the ontogenetic trajectory
   of gaze following among Barbary macaques. Probability of gaze following
   when a model monkey sitting within the field of sight of the subject
   showed a facial expression (N = 167, black squares) and when it simply
   gazed into a certain direction without a particular facial expression
   (N = 708, white squares), for the different age classes. Solid and
   dashed/dotted lines represent the fitted curves and the 95% confidence
   intervals from logistic regression analysis.
   With permission from John Wiley &amp; Sons Inc. Teufel, C., Gutmann,
   A., Pirow, R., Fischer, J., 2010. Facial expressions modulate the
   ontogenetic trajectory of gaze-following among monkeys. Dev. Sci. 13,
   913–922. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-7687.2010.00956.x.
   (BUTTON) Show more
   View chapterExplore book
   Read full chapter
   URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B978012809324521
   0110
   Reference work
   Learning and Memory: A Comprehensive Reference (Second Edition)
   2017, Learning and Memory: A Comprehensive Reference (Second Edition)
   Julia Fischer

   Chapter

Gaze following in infancy: Five big questions that the field should answer

   2022, Advances in Child Development and BehaviorKim Astor, Gustaf
   Gredebäck

1.2 The gaze following test paradigm

   In the standard gaze following paradigm (designed to measure
   spontaneous gaze following), an interaction partner (actor) typically
   looks at the participant before shifting her gaze towards a target
   object. In infant studies, there are generally two objects placed on
   either side of the actor (target and distractor) within infants' visual
   field Fig. 1. Variations of this paradigm do exist where there, for
   example, are no gaze targets (Thorup, Nyström, Bölte, & Falck-Ytter,
   2021), where there are more than two targets (von Hofsten, Dahlström, &
   Fredriksson, 2005), and where the targets are placed outside of
   infants' visual field (Deák, Flom, & Pick, 2000), but these are rare.
   The response of following the actor's gaze direction is often seen as a
   deliberate, top-down action initiated by the infant (for alternative
   views, see Deák, 2015; Moore, 2008). Studies use different operational
   definitions to capture gaze following, depending in part on the
   technique used to record infants gaze following (e.g., video coding and
   eye-tracking): (1) accuracy of first look from the agent's face to a
   target (Astor, Thiele, & Gredebäck, 2021), (2) relative looking time to
   the target and distractor (Senju et al., 2015), (3) frequency/number of
   gaze alterations between gaze target and the agent (Hernik & Broesch,
   2019), and (4) latencies to fixate the target (Gredebäck, Fikke, &
   Melinder, 2010). The first look metric is generally regarded as the
   gold standard gaze following metric, used in most studies, representing
   the accuracy of the initial response to another person's gaze shift
   (Gredebäck, Johnson, & von Hofsten, 2010).
   Fig. 1

   Fig. 1. An exemplar gaze following paradigm from Astor and Gredebäck
   (2019) utilizing eye-tracking technology. The left image illustrates
   the greeting phase where the actor establishes eye contact with the
   infant. Then, in the gaze phase (right image), the actor turns to look
   at an object at her side. Included are three areas of interest (black
   rectangles, not visible in the stimuli) used to calculate gaze
   following.
   (BUTTON) Show more
   View chapterExplore book
   Read full chapter
   URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S006524072200019
   2
   Book series
   2022, Advances in Child Development and Behavior
   Kim Astor, Gustaf Gredebäck

   Chapter

Anterior Eye

   2018, Contact Lens Practice (Third Edition)John G. Lawrenson

Eyelids

   The eyelids are two mobile folds of skin that perform several important
   functions: they act as occluders that shield the eyes from excessive
   light, and through their reflex closure they afford protection against
   injury. The lids also form a precorneal tear film of uniform thickness
   during the upturn phase of each blink. The action of blinking is also
   important for tear drainage.

Gross Anatomy

   The eyelids are joined at their extremities, termed ‘the canthi’, and
   when the eye is open, an elliptical space, the palpebral fissure, is
   formed between the lid margins. In the adult, the length of the fissure
   is approximately 30–31 mm, with a vertical height of 10–11 mm. In the
   primary position, the upper lid, which is the larger and more mobile of
   the two, typically covers approximately the upper third of the cornea,
   whilst the lower lid is level with the inferior corneal limbus (Fig.
   2.14). Important differences in eyelid anatomy exist between Asian and
   Caucasian eyes (Saonanon, 2014). The most obvious feature of the Asian
   eye is the absent or very low lid fold and fuller upper eyelid.

   The eyelid margins are about 2 mm thick from front to back. The
   posterior quarter consists of conjunctival mucosa and the anterior
   three-quarters is skin. The junction between the two is referred to as
   the mucocutaneous junction. There has recently been a renewed interest
   in the marginal zone of the human eyelid, with the identification of
   the role of the inner lid border, termed the ‘lid-wiper’ owing to the
   analogy to a windscreen wiper, in the distribution of the tear film
   (Knop et al., 2011a, 2012). Two or three rows of eyelashes (cilia)
   arise from the anterior border of the lid margins. These are longer and
   more numerous in the upper lid. The lashes receive a rich sensory nerve
   supply, and their sensitivity provides an effective alerting mechanism.

   The meibomian (tarsal) gland orifices emerge just anterior to the
   mucocutaneous junction (Fig. 2.15). About 30–40 glands open onto the
   upper margin, and slightly fewer (20–40) onto the lower. On eversion of
   the lids the yellowish meibomian acini are visible as yellow clusters
   through the tarsal conjunctiva (Bron et al., 1991; Knop et al., 2011b).
   Meibomian glands can be more clearly visualized using infrared
   meibography, and instruments that use this method are now commercially
   available (Srinivasan et al., 2012) (Fig. 2.16). At the medial angle,
   the eyelid margins enclose a triangular space – the lacus lacrimalis –
   which contains the plica semilunaris and the caruncle. Lacrimal
   papillae are small elevations located 5–6 mm from the medial canthal
   angle, which contains a small aperture (punctum) that is the opening to
   the lacrimal drainage system.

Muscles of the Eyelids

   Movements of the eyelids are governed by the coordinated action of
   several muscles.

Orbicularis Oculi

   The orbicularis oculi is the sphincter muscle of the eyelids, and can
   anatomically be divided into two main divisions: the palpebral and the
   orbital (Fig. 2.17). Fibres of the palpebral division arise from the
   medial palpebral ligament and arc across the eyelids in a series of
   half-ellipses, meeting at the lateral canthus to form a lateral raphe.
   The lateral palpebral ligament also acts as an anchor point. The
   palpebral division can be further subdivided into marginal, pretarsal
   and preseptal parts. The marginal part (pars ciliaris), which is also
   known as Riolans muscle, is responsible for maintaining the apposition
   of the lid to the cornea during lid closure. A third part of the muscle
   (pars lacrimalis) is closely associated with the lacrimal outflow
   pathway. The pars lacrimalis (also known as Horner’s muscle) encloses
   the canaliculi and provides attachments to the lacrimal sac and its
   associated fascia.

   The orbital part of the orbicularis oculi lies outside the palpebral
   division and extends for some distance beyond the orbital margins.
   Muscle fibres arise predominantly from bone at the medial orbital rim
   and appear to sweep around the lids without interruption as a series of
   complete ellipses. However, studies have shown that the muscle fibres
   of the orbital and palpebral division of the orbicularis are relatively
   short (0.4–2.1 mm) and overlapping (Lander et al., 1996). The regional
   divisions of the orbicularis also show a functional distinction. The
   action of the palpebral part of the muscle is to produce the reflex or
   voluntary closure of the lids during blinking. Contraction of the
   orbital division produces the forcible closure of the lids that occurs
   in sneezing or in response to a painful stimulus.

Levator Palpebrae Superioris

   The levator palpebrae superioris is primarily responsible for elevating
   the upper lid during blinking and for maintaining an open palpebral
   aperture. The levator palpebrae arises from the lesser wing of the
   sphenoid, above and anterior to the optic canal, and runs forward along
   the roof of the orbit above the superior rectus before terminating
   anteriorly in a fan-shaped tendon (aponeurosis). Some fibres are
   attached to the anterior surface of the tarsal plate, whilst the
   remainder pass between fascicles of the orbicularis (Fig. 2.18). The
   superior palpebral sulcus forms at the upper border of the attachment
   to the orbicularis.

Superior and Inferior Tarsal Muscles (of Müller)

   These smooth muscles arise from the lower border of the levator in the
   upper lid and the inferior rectus in the lower lid, and insert into the
   orbital margins of the tarsal plates. The role of the superior tarsal
   muscle is to assist the levator in maintaining the width of the
   palpebral aperture. A mild degree of ptosis results from damage to its
   sympathetic nerve supply (Horner’s syndrome).

Control of Eyelid Movements

   Movements of the eyelids occur through the coordinated action of
   several muscles – the levator palpebrae, tarsal muscles, the
   orbicularis oculi and the frontalis. The elevation of the upper lid and
   the control of its vertical position are mediated principally by the
   levator. In vertical gaze, lid position and eye movements are closely
   linked. During elevation the state of contraction of the levator is
   varied to maximize visibility. In extreme upgaze, lid retraction is
   augmented by the action of the frontalis, which elevates the eyebrows.
   In downgaze, coordinated lid movements similarly occur through levator
   relaxation. In periodic and reflex blinks, the levator is spontaneously
   inhibited prior to orbicularis contraction in lid closure. Similarly,
   in lid opening the orbicularis relaxes, followed by contraction of the
   levator. Spontaneous eye-blink activity is influenced by both central
   and peripheral factors (Tsubota, 1998).

   Compared with the upper lid, the lower lid is relatively immobile and
   has no counterpart to the levator palpebrae. The depression of the
   lower lid that occurs in downgaze is due to the attachment of the
   sheaths of the inferior oblique and inferior rectus muscles to the
   tarsal plate via a fibrous extension.

Microscopic Anatomy

   The histological appearance of the upper and lower lids is similar, and
   in sagittal section the following six tissue layers can be resolved:
   skin, subcutaneous connective tissue, muscle layer, submuscular
   connective tissue, tarsal plate and palpebral conjunctiva (Fig. 2.19).

   The eyelid skin is thin and very elastic. It is continuous with the
   palpebral conjunctiva at the lid margin, and keratinization is
   maintained up to this mucocutaneous junction. The subcutaneous
   connective tissue is composed of a loose areolar tissue and contains
   hair follicles and associated glands. The muscle layer consists of
   striated muscle fibres of the orbicularis oculi, which are arranged in
   bundles (fascicles) separated by connective tissue. The orbicularis
   extends throughout the lid. The marginal part of the muscle (Riolan’s
   muscle) is separated from the pretarsal portion by connective tissue
   that contains the eyelash follicles. The loose submuscular connective
   tissue layer lies between the orbicularis and the tarsal plate and
   contains the major nerves and vessels of the lid.

   The tarsal plates (tarsi) are composed of dense fibrous connective
   tissue and provide support and determine lid shape. They are anchored
   to the orbital margins by the medial and lateral palpebral ligaments.
   Each tarsus is approximately 25 mm long and 1–2 mm thick. The upper
   tarsus is semioval with a height of 11 mm at its midpoint, whereas the
   inferior tarsus is narrower (4 mm in height). The posterior surface of
   the eyelid is lined by the palpebral conjunctiva, which is firmly
   adherent to the underlying tarsal plate.

Glands of the Eyelids

Meibomian Glands

   The tarsal plates contain the acini and ducts of the meibomian (tarsal)
   glands. Ducts are vertically oriented with respect to the lid margins,
   with multiple secretory acini that open laterally onto each duct. The
   glands occupy nearly the full length and width of each tarsus, and are
   fewer and shorter in the lower lid. Histologically, the acini are lined
   by a layer of undifferentiated basal cells that divide, and cells are
   displaced from the basement membrane. As they progress towards the duct
   they gradually enlarge and develop lipid droplets in their cytoplasm
   (Fig. 2.20). Ultimately, cell membranes rupture and cellular debris,
   together with the lipid product, is discharged into the duct.

   The stimulus for meibomian gland secretion is unclear. Although a
   modest autonomic innervation of the meibomian glands has been
   demonstrated, there is still some doubt regarding a neuromodulation of
   glandular secretion; it is likely that the principal control of the
   glands is hormonal, and both androgens and oestrogens have been shown
   to regulate meibomian secretion (Sullivan et al., 2000; Knop et al.,
   2011b). A long ductal system carries the secretion to the lid margin,
   and the compressive action of the palpebral division of the orbicularis
   oculi on the meibomian ducts facilitates the flow of lipid and its
   eventual delivery onto the lid margins.

Glands of Zeis and Moll

   Ciliary glands of Zeis and Moll are found in association with eyelash
   follicles (Takahashi et al., 2013) (Fig. 2.21). Zeis glands are
   unilobular sebaceous glands that open directly into the follicle. The
   function of their oily secretion is to lubricate the lashes to prevent
   them from drying out and becoming brittle. Glands of Moll are modified
   sweat glands (apocrine) consisting of an unbranched spiral tubule. The
   exact function of these glands is unclear, although their secretion is
   rich in IgA, which suggest a role in the immune defence of the ocular
   surface (Stoeckelhuber et al., 2003).

Blood and Nerve Supply

Nerves of the Eyelids

   The levator palpebrae and orbicularis oculi muscles are innervated by
   the oculomotor and facial nerves, respectively. The sensory supply of
   the upper lid derives from branches of the ophthalmic nerve
   (supraorbital, supratrochlear and lacrimal). The supply to the lower
   lid comes from branches of the maxillary nerve (zygomatic,
   infraorbital).

Blood and Lymphatic Supply to the Eyelids

   The arterial supply derives from branches of the ophthalmic, lacrimal
   and infraorbital arteries, which contribute to two palpebral arcades in
   the upper lid and one in the lower. Branches from these arcades supply
   the skin, orbicularis, tarsal glands and palpebral conjunctiva. Veins
   of the eyelids empty into veins of the forehead and temple, and some
   empty into the ophthalmic vein. Lymphatics drain to the preauricular
   and submandibular lymph nodes.
   (BUTTON) Show more
   View chapterExplore book
   Read full chapter
   URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B978070206660300
   0022
   Book
   Contact Lens Practice (Third Edition)
   2018, Contact Lens Practice (Third Edition)
   John G. Lawrenson

   Chapter

Behavioral Clues for Detection of Illness in Wild Animals: Models in Camelids
and Elephants

   2008, Zoo and Wild Animal Medicine (Sixth Edition)Murray E. Fowler

Eyes

   The large expressive eyes of SACs immediately attract attention, and it
   has been said that the eye is the window to the emotional state of an
   animal. Much may be learned by attentive evaluation of the eye
   (eyeball, eyelids). Observant people are quick to perceive a person's
   emotional state or illness on the basis of eye clarity, pupillary
   dilation or constriction, and eyelid position. Often a mother has only
   to look into the eyes of a child to sense excitement, apathy,
   depression, or guilt of a misdeed. The eyes of healthy or ill animals
   are also revealing. It is difficult to describe an apathetic look or a
   pained expression, but these are present in animals as well as humans.

   The eyes of a healthy SAC should be clear and bright. The pupils should
   respond quickly to extra light. Poking a finger toward the eye should
   produce a blink reflex. The appearance of the eyes provides the basis
   for abnormal countenance (facial expression).

   The cornea of an animal that is ill may appear to be glazed or cloudy.
   The pupil may be slow or nonresponsive to light, and the animal may not
   respond to a finger poked toward the eye. A SAC may have an inattentive
   gaze (“star gazing”). Closed eyelids indicate pain associated with the
   eye. Some systemic as well as local diseases stimulate excessive
   tearing or discharge.
   (BUTTON) Show more
   View chapterExplore book
   Read full chapter
   URL: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B978141604047750
   0075
   Book
   Zoo and Wild Animal Medicine (Sixth Edition)
   2008, Zoo and Wild Animal Medicine (Sixth Edition)
   Murray E. Fowler

Related terms:

     * Cranial Nerve
     * Limb
     * Eye Movement
     * Face
     * Saccadic Eye Movement
     * Superior Colliculus
     * Haplorhini
     * Click
     * Motion
     * Cornea Reflex

   View all Topics

Recommended publications

   (BUTTON) Info icon
     * Journal of the Neurological Sciences
       Journal of the Neurological Sciences
       Journal
     * Pediatric Neurology
       Pediatric Neurology
       Journal
     * The Lancet
       The Lancet
       Journal
     * Journal of Clinical Neuroscience
       Journal of Clinical Neuroscience
       Journal

   Browse books and journals
   Elsevier logo with wordmark
     * About ScienceDirect
     * Remote access
     * Contact and support
     * Terms and conditions
     * Privacy policy
     * (BUTTON) Cookie settings

   All content on this site: Copyright © 2025 Elsevier B.V., its
   licensors, and contributors. All rights are reserved, including those
   for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies. For
   all open access content, the relevant licensing terms apply.
   RELX group home page
