   #RSS Feed

   0

   Skip to Content
   its(t)artswithadam

   About
   Blog
   Contact
   (BUTTON) Open Menu Close Menu
   its(t)artswithadam

   About
   Blog
   Contact
   (BUTTON) Open Menu Close Menu

   About
   Blog
   Contact

What is the ‘Gaze’ in Art?

   Jan 31
   Written By Adam Geczy

   Most art and film enthusiasts have heard of the ‘male gaze’ and the
   ‘colonial gaze’ and so on. These labels suggest that the gaze, way in
   which we approach looking, is not innocent. It is caught up with a
   whole set of presumptions and rules. These can boil down to what gender
   we are, where we come from, what we know and what we expect.

   One key thing to remember is that when it comes to art, gazing is
   largely about power. It's rude to stare at a person for a long while
   but we can stare at a work of art for as long as we want. But then we
   need to consider the role and nature of the artist in his or her gaze
   and how that effects of understanding of what is being represented.

Introduction

   To gaze is to look, specifically to look at which then means to look at
   in a particular way? How does that particular way affect what we see?
   When you’re hungry you’ll look at some delicious food in a different
   way from when you’re no longer hungry. But then, can an artist
   represent food in such a way that makes you feel hungry or remember
   when you were? These are nuances of the gaze, but there are also some
   delicate ideological concerns as well regarding race, nationality,
   gender etc.

   A brief look at the various key philosophical positions concerning the
   gaze show that we seldom if at all just look. For our own part we bring
   to the image as many assumptions and expectations as there are within
   the artwork itself.

   It is only by looking closely at this binary approach of imaging versus
   gazing that we can begin to ask where the art object is located. For
   what is seen is shaped by the viewer’s expectations, which are bound up
   with an intricate combination of social mores; add to that subjective
   expectations and the vicissitudes of feeling.

   In the end the only answer is this: once the work of art ceases to
   excite responses, no longer elicits our gaze, once it loses its
   intrigue and the secret is uncovered, then as a object of contemplation
   it is exists only as something dried out, inertly expended like a
   filled-in crossword or a mastered computer game. The greatest works of
   art continually pose alternatives to our habits of image formation, or
   challenge the way we look at the world, or both.

   A prime quality of looking at something that we know to be a work of
   art is that we know that there is something more to what we are seeing.
   When we see something, it is recognition, knowing.

   When something is not formally recognized then it will be understood in
   terms of similar qualities already seen. There is no such thing as an
   innocent eye, nor is sight ever perfect. When art is successful it
   compensates for the inadequacies of our sight, perception and knowledge
   by rendering something visible in a way that is superior to mechanisms
   available to us in everyday life.

   Art has the capacity to displace what in everyday life is a limitation,
   and to make things be seen as if shorn of what is habitual. Its
   presentational clarity typically poses itself as a mystery. So, we are
   back where we started: we have to look beyond what is before us.

   The theories of looking with regard to art and society oscillate
   between these two poles of either accounting for the inadequacy of
   representation, or arguing that art at its finest exemplifies the
   deeper sight of looking, vision, which strips away the world’s artifice
   and gives us a deeper perception of the world that reveals itself to us
   gradually, like a lesson.

Prisoners of the cave

   As introduced in the last chapter, Plato’s allegory of the cave makes
   us prisoners of the inadequacy of our gaze. The famous passage is in
   Book VII of the Republic:

     Behold! Human beings living in an underground den; here they have
     been from their childhood, and have their legs and necks chained so
     they cannot move, and can only see before them, being prevented by
     the chains from turning round their heads. Above and behind them a
     fire is blazing at a distance […] and you will see, if you look, a
     low wall built along the way, like the screen which marionette
     players have in front of them, over which they show the puppets.

   Condemned to see only shadows of the truth, Plato instructs us to
   distrust everything we see, a distrust that defines Western vision,
   which by nature distinguishes between different activities of seeing,
   based on the degrees by which something calls for interpretation.

   Linguistic and phenomenological philosophies of the twentieth century
   have contested the validity of this distinction, since identifying
   something is by nature interpretative, though perhaps not profoundly
   so, and what we don’t identify or name we barely see, and it falls from
   our consciousness and memory.

The Kantian subject

   While Kant retained the distinction between what he called
   things-in-themselves (noumenon) and things-as-appearance (phenomenon),
   he accounted for the incompleteness of our knowledge by arguing that we
   are limited to seeing the world through the formal boundaries of space
   and time.

   How we see and what we choose to see are relative to these two
   perimeters. Although we may be limited in our apprehension of the
   world, we are nevertheless possessed of free will, and the sublime, the
   experience of what exceeds our understanding, is abstract proof of
   this.

   Thus, the Kantian subject is no longer an object of understanding from
   elsewhere (i.e. God), but his or her own object of understanding, a
   free agent, capable of making independent decisions.

   This independence opens a Pandora’s box that contains some of the
   problems inherent in Modernity itself: political, social and artistic.
   In the Romantics’ developments out of Kant (note again that they were
   not in line with Kant’s own intentions), the subject has a point of
   view that is indefinably his/hers, as opposed to what the philosopher
   Foucault (1926-84) referred to as the classical subject whose point of
   view was only an inferior facsimile of a unitary truth.

   The Kantian subject is coterminous with the democratic subject who, by
   the middle to late eighteenth century, has the luxury of entitlement to
   an opinion and can self-consciously adopt an individual view of the
   world, or Weltanschauung.

   And as I have suggested already, the new rights of the Enlightenment
   may have had salutary consequences for politics but the democracy of
   the gaze engendered not one right way of seeing, but many.

   The concept of external law gave over to internal consensus.

   This dilemma was already located by Kant who stressed the limitations
   of the thinking being. As Slovaj Zizek comments about Kant:

     man’s finitude is not the simple finitude of an inner-worldly entity
     lost in the overwhelming totality of the universe. The knowing
     subject is a substanceless point of pure self-relating (the ‘I
     Think’) which is not ‘part of the world’ but is, on the contrary,
     correlative to ‘world’ as such and therefore ontologically
     constitutive: ‘world’, ‘reality’ as we know them, can appear only
     within the horizon of the subject’s finitude.

   When we relate this back to the gaze we deal with a certain lack which
   is both constitutive and the object of the gaze, which is the discovery
   of Lacan (1901-81) via the thought of Sartre (1905-80).

The gaze and the Other

   Kant’s philosophy may be relevant to the shift in the agency of the
   individual subject in relation to what he or she sees and knows, but
   Sartre was the first philosopher to explore the gaze per se as a
   function of the way we position ourselves in the world.

   What separates the gaze from just a look is that the gaze is active as
   opposed to passive and is performed with intent. In this dualism, there
   is the subject and the Other (capitalized in the English because unlike
   the French autrui, we do not have a special word for it).

   Our understanding of ourselves, the self-reflection that defines us as
   subjects, is reflected in others. However, we become aware of the
   Other’s presence when we are subjected to the gaze, thereby noticing
   that someone external to us has the power to discriminate similar to
   ours.

   The operable word here is power: in moments when we are startled, the
   presence of the gaze is the most pronounced.

   Sartre gives the example of the start we have when hearing a branch
   crack behind us: the feeling of vulnerability begins with being the
   recipient, not the agent, of the gaze. One of the most remarkable
   aspects of Sartre’s observation is that the gaze is not necessarily
   beholden to sight. Some suspenseful movies are built on this very
   principle, as are cultural critiques by minorities, as I will show in a
   moment.

   In one of his famous examples, Sartre relates the shame we feel when
   caught at spying through a keyhole that results in the gaze’s abrupt
   reversal. Only then, as on object of the gaze, does one become aware of
   the subjectivity that one had as holder of the gaze: ‘the person is
   present in consciousness inasmuch as he/she is the object of the
   Other.’

   The shame that this realization engenders is

     shame of oneself, being the recognition that I am well and am well
     and truly the object that the other gazes at and judges. I am only
     shamed by the loss of my freedom through becoming a given object.[…]
     And this ‘me’ that I am is only within the world where the Other has
     alienated me, […] [emphasis Sartre’s]

   Sartre had taken the first step by stating that we are made conscious
   of ourselves as subjects by another subject who makes us the object of
   the gaze, at which point Jacques Lacan replies that the only acceptable
   positioning of the gaze is therefore on the side of the Other.

Lacan, the gaze and lack

   Lacan agrees with Sartre’s insight that the gaze is not limited to
   sight, but he emphasizes that the look and the gaze are a split
   inherent in a drive that is manifested within ‘the scopic field’, an
   overarching zone of vision that is enlisted by desire or, in Lacan’s
   case lack, the cause of desire.

   The gaze is a look driven by need. Without lack, there can be no gaze.
   But Lacan goes even further: without lack there can be no
   consciousness, as the gaze is the ‘underside’ of consciousness. Lack of
   what? The phallus, but conceived of by Lacan in non-literal, mystical
   terms: not limited to the penis, the phallus is what defines the split
   between the sexes. For men it is what they have but is incomplete, for
   women it is what they do not have and what they want. Both desire it,
   but women want it more.

   I will return to this touchy point. In his discourse on the gaze Lacan
   sticks to the term object petit a, ‘a’ being the key term in the
   algorithm of the gaze, where ‘a’ is the essence of the gaze. It is what
   the gaze seeks—although we know now that seeking defines it—and what
   eternally eludes it.

   Hans Holbein the Younger. Jean de Dinteville and Georges de Selve ('The
   Ambassadors'). 1533. The National Gallery, London. Via Artsy

   In a wonderful ruse, Lacan calls upon Hans Holbein’s Ambassadors
   (1533), to illustrate the gaze itself as a process of eluding. He draws
   attention to the partly imperceptible thin diagonal form cutting across
   the foreground, a skull distorted by anamorphosis, a technique popular
   in Holbein’s time. Lacan makes the audacious suggestion that ‘Holbein
   makes visible for us here something that is simply the subject that is
   annihilated—annihilated in the form that is, strictly speaking, the
   imagined embodiment of the minus-phi  [(-f)] of castration’.

   If we are to see the phallus, to be in its presence, it can only be at
   the expense of its own extinction and the anullment of the gaze itself,
   hence the death of the one who sees; the stretched skull is the symbol
   or better, proxy, for a black hole. It is through this confrontation
   with ‘the anamorphic ghost’ that the gaze is then able to imagine
   itself ‘in its pulsate, dazzling and spread out function’.

   The painting locates precisely what Lacan says any picture is ‘a trap
   for the gaze’. Since pictures are not people, we can gaze at them,
   stare at them no less, without fear of reprisal, embarrassment—shame.

   In looking closely and at length at a picture we are not just looking
   at features of representation and description, rather our love of
   illusion is what both empties out the gaze, sucks it up, but as much
   momentarily satisfies it, makes it replete.

Feminist revisions: the male gaze

   The two major rebuttals to Lacan’s influential theses came with his
   former student, Luce Irigaray (b. 1930) and the film theorist, Laura
   Mulvey (b. 1941). Irigaray is one of the great feminist minds.

   She mounted an assault on Lacan’s centredness of the phallus and posed
   the alternative of the gap or cut, but also problematized binarization
   itself, which is the cornerstone of Western logic and power, since
   binarization seldom admits of parity. In dominant discourse Woman is
   the other that defines Man.

   But for Irgaray, Woman does not inhabit this binary; she is not an
   alternative to man but a wholly different configuration, possessed of a
   different kind of body and operating along different emotional and
   intellectual lines.

   The phallus may be elusive, says Irigaray, but the feminine eludes the
   phallus. What we universally define as thought is properly called male,
   or phallocentric thought whose persuasiveness comes at the expense of
   excluding the feminine. Irigaray’s project is to reclaim a space for
   the feminine through highlighting alternative values and avenues of
   thought.

   At roughly the same time as Irigaray, Laura Mulvey coined the term ‘the
   male gaze’ in her 1973 essay ‘ Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema’ to
   define the condition of the way in which women were viewed by postwar
   Hollywood cinema.

   Mulvey points to a ‘sexual imbalance, [wherein] pleasure in looking has
   been split between active/male and passive/female’. This dichotomy
   controls the narrative structure, reducing women to the status of
   vulnerability as always being the receptors of the gaze.

   Taking up the Lacanian assertion that the gaze is threatened by the
   very thing it seeks—since to found something only affirms what the gaze
   lacks—Mulvey states that the male gaze is subdivided into two seemingly
   incompatible stereotypes, for which the feminist shorthand is
   madonna/whore.

   The first is ‘fetisihistic scopophilia’ (scopophilia—‘love of looking’)
   in which women are beauteous items for visual delectation; the second,
   ‘voyeurism’, is the obverse, a sadism that ends in submission and
   defeat of its object/victim. More insidious still, as Mulvey argues,
   narrative film forces women viewers into ownership of the male gaze as
   well, since they see on behalf of the male protagonist who is supported
   by the ostensibly universal, but actually male eye of the camera.

   The artist who epitomizes the subjection of the female by the male gaze
   is Cindy Sherman, particularly in the work that launched her career,
   Untitled Film Stills (1977-80) which look like they have been extracted
   from classic film noir. Although staged, with the artist the
   centerpiece in different roles and costumes, one cannot help but be
   disarmed by their air of authenticity.

   The one constant is the manner in which the nameless woman is steeped
   in vulnerability and sexual availability, in expectation of the male
   presence of which she is a mere symptom. With her mime of
   defenselessness and subordination, Sherman maneuvers her viewers
   squarely into the shoes of the male gaze.
   [i.TheGaze.png]

Historical precursors

   In light of Mulvey’s essay it is possible to say that the salient
   historical precursor to the male gaze is found in Baudelaire’s flâneur.
   Flâner is to amble or stroll, but as a result of his essay ‘The Painter
   of Modern Life’ (1863), Baudelaire (1821-67) all but takes theoretical
   ownership of the word.

   The flâneur is the eternal observer of the modern city, the detached,
   possibly bohemian (and therefore nobly indifferent to both the lower
   and middle classes), consumer of the spectacle of the delightful,
   ever-changing, dangerous, teeming city.

   The Surrealist writer Louis Aragon (1897-1982) would later take up this
   idea in his novel-cum-prose poem Paris Peasant (1926), in which the
   writer-narrator seeks out an array of encounters with city
   paraphernalia, odd people, motley scenes, singling out jarring
   juxtapositions that average city dwellers take for granted.

   But as feminists have shown, the Baudelairean flâneur is in confident
   possession of the male gaze, not to mention the male body. In
   nineteenth century cities women were not as free to wander the streets.
   Their susceptibility to the gaze was a regular indication of their
   limited freedoms in comparison to men.

   The Paris in Baudelaire’s thrall was the Paris that evolved as a result
   of the vast redevelopment at the hands of Napoleon III’s minister of
   public works, Baron Hausmann, who tore up the tangle of rank old
   streets which were narrow enough to be the potential shelter to
   barricading revolutionaries.

   In their place he installed the large sweeping boulevards for which
   Paris is now known. With this the concept of public space were born,
   and with it a new visibility.  Such spaces opened up new zones of
   sociability where en masse people were able to indulge their joy of
   seeing, which is still one of the charms of the great cafés of Europe.

   ‘The artist, the true artist’, as Baudelaire proclaimed in his Salon de
   1845, ‘will be the one who can extract what is epic from modern life’.
   The expanded parameters and status of roving, free (male) seeing is a
   chief characteristic of Modernity and was integral to the birth of
   Impressionism, where, if one looks closely, delineates between private
   and public space, the interior and the panorama.

   Balcony, Boulevard Haussmann. By Gustave Caillebotte. 1880. Via Artsy

   The cliché that Impressionists were obsessed by light oversteps the
   issue of their responsiveness to all kinds of spectacle, high and low.
   The emphasis on visibility reflected in the painterly technique of
   Manet and the Impressionists is inseparable from the complex form of
   social visibility that developed out of shifting social organization
   that resulted from increased urbanization (the mass migration from
   country to city that occurred around 1870) and the birth of the modern
   metropolis.

   Impressionism was also the first movement in art that publicly
   encouraged the success of women, namely Marie Cassatt (1844-1926) and
   Berthe Morisot (1841-95). In an approach analogous but more
   historically extensive than Mulvey’s, Griselda Pollock compares their
   works with the great male artists of the time, such as Manet (1832-83),
   Pissarro (1830-1903), Degas (1834-1917), Monet (1840-1926) and
   Caillebotte (1848-94), and observes a difference in the subject matter,
   the deportment of the figures and the spaces they occupy, prompting the
   question as to whether there really is a female vision.

   Both Cassatt (who never bore children) and Morisot (who did)
   concentrate a large part of their output on women, girls and children,
   particularly the mother-child relationship. Pollock convincingly shows
   how the strictures enforced on the middle-class female are mirrored in
   pictorial spaces which are in many respects enclosed, whether through
   tight compositions, the deportment of the female figures themselves, or
   through privileging the domestic interior.

   Concluding an analysis of a work by Cassatt, Pollock states the artist
   ‘manipulated space and compositional structure to endow what women did
   in the home with respect and seriousness, while at the same time being
   able to make us recognize the limitations resulting from the
   confinement of bourgeois women in the domestic sphere alone’.

   The Child's Bath. By Mary Cassatt. 1893. Via Artsy

   By contrast, in paintings by men there is a greater oscillation between
   inside and outside space, with emphasis on the latter. As Pollock
   notes, the everyday gendering of space—women inside, men
   outside—affected pictorial representation. It is an open question,
   however, as to whether this gendering of vision is essential or
   conditioned.

The Colonial subject, Orientalism and the Imperial Gaze

   When it came those to which the active Enlightenment subject trained
   his gaze, women were still treated as objects, as were non-Western
   peoples, who were the objects of knowledge.

   Evidently the modern, European subject believed himself to be the only
   viable one, and until others were converted to their way of thinking,
   they could not be treated as subjects. ‘Primitive’ cultures—African,
   North American, South American, Indonesian, Pacific Islander,
   Australasian, in short, the rest of the world—took their name because
   they were considered by the Western eye to be in a state of arrested
   development.

   The appropriation of the East—a vast generalization in itself, covering
   everything from Turkey to Siam (Thailand) to Madagascar—began in
   earnest with the imperial wars between Holland, Portugal, Spain,
   England and France at the end of the sixteenth century. In art it is
   evident in the Moorish influence came much earlier and is everywhere in
   the architecture of Venice and in paintings such as those of Jacopo
   Bellini (c.1396 – c.1470).

   In France in the seventeenth century many vestiary silks, wall
   coverings and tapestries bore the mark of a new titilatory style,
   ‘Chinoiserie’, which was about as generically unspecific as a packet of
   dried ‘Asian’ flavoured noodles.

   Well might the designation of Asian have entered into today’s popular
   speech, but its crassness as a generalization—still worse France
   continues to employ the anachronism ‘Orient’—lies in the fact that it
   can be extended to over eighty percent of the world’s population.

   Edward Said, who coined the term ‘Orientalism’, explains that it is an
   idea that asserts Europe’s self-assured dominance:

     In a quite constant way, Orientalism depends for its strategy on
     this flexible positional superiority, which puts the Westerner in a
     whole series of possible relationships with the Orient without ever
     losing him the relative upper hand.

   It is a double-standard that is played out to this very day with
   Western tourism. We have the means to explore countries that are both
   constricted by and dependent on our own, whose people have meager means
   of survival let alone the ability to travel.

   It was by the nineteenth century that this dominance became entrenched,
   by which time the ‘Oriental’ was a style had permeated from the arts
   into fashion and interior decoration. The academician Jean-Léon Gérôme
   (1824-1904) made a career of turning out crisply painted canvases of
   Middle eastern and North African scenes—snake charmers, harems, slave
   traders—the men swarthy, brutish and usually indolent, the women
   underclothed, nubile and frequently pallid, the boys lithe sexualized
   ephebes.

   In short, the Oriental ‘other’ is made into a fetishized stereotype
   that reflects the Western male’s desires rather than observes
   considerations of cultural respect.

   The Snake Charmer. By Jean-Léon Gérôme. 1879. Photograph: Sterling and
   Francine Clark Art Institute. Via The Guardian

   Nonetheless, the exotic other had a definitive role to play for the
   European avant-garde, and even in extraordinary cases such as Paul
   Gauguin (1848-1903) or the German Expressionist Erich Heckel
   (1883-1970), who had direct contact with the peoples who influenced
   their art, the upper hand is still there.

   The Seed of the Areoi, oil on burlap by Paul Gauguin. 1892. The Museum
   of Modern Art, New York City. Via Britannica

   For the ‘Primitive urge’ as it is expressed within late nineteenth and
   early twentieth century painting rests upon a contradiction. The
   ‘primitive’ other is elevated to an eminence that sets him/her/it above
   the European.

   By virtue of being ‘primitive’, such peoples were/are viewed as having
   a vigour which the European thinks he has lost. By making use of the
   ‘primitive’, the European is given a special boost to truth.

   So, the superiority of the ‘primitive’ is a chimera, determined solely
   according to the use to which the Westerner can put him. Moreover, the
   appropriation of the ‘primitive’ is selective, without much concern for
   the ritual meaning and uses of the motifs; the keynote is that the
   ‘primitive’ is manipulated to make a new Western style whose art is
   superior to the art or artifacts which it borrowed (stole).

   In recent decades feminist scholars have rightly pointed out that the
   contradiction was/is the same for men’s use of the female form: Woman
   may be idolized, but this idolization is not positive as it drains her
   of life; she is symbolic, inert and objectified for the purpose of
   fulfilling particular uses and desires specific to men.

   The objectification of the ‘primitive’ and of Woman converges in
   paintings by Picasso, particularly in those during the time of his
   co-discovery of Cubism around 1907. Here women are made the receptacle
   of all of the artist’s harshest, darkest passions. Nameless and
   characterless, they are a grade up from beasts, forces of nature given
   shape, ugly and angular.

   Les Demoiselles d’Avignon. By Pablo Picasso. 1907. Via MoMA

   Circumstances of the presumptuous Imperial gaze may have shifted to a
   more self-critical conscience within the academy, but they have not for
   tourism or advertising which are ready to exploit anything with exotic
   appeal.

   (Note the woolly definition of exotic; and is something appealing for
   being exotic or is something exotic appealing?)

   A problem with the fraught legacy of colonialism is that resetting the
   mark cannot be achieved ideologically or without due reflection. In
   other words, the Orientalist critique cannot be mounted to discredit
   writers and artists wholesale.

   When we delve deeper into Gauguin’s experience for example, and read
   his letters, and look longer at his later testimonial paintings, we
   sense palpable disappointment at the plight of the Tahitians at Western
   hands, an honest joy taken in their ritual, and a gratefulness at them
   for teaching him ways of relating to the world differently. He was too
   sensitive not to know that his own presence was a symptom of the
   scourge of Europeanization (that brought smallpox and venereal disease)
   that was ravaging the indigenous populations, and which consumed him as
   well.

   His final masterpiece, Where Do We Come From? What Are We? Where Are We
   Going? (1897-8) is a spiritual allegory composed in the spirit of peace
   and transcultural sympathy.

   Paul Gauguin, Where Do We Come From? What Are We? Where Are We Going?
   1897-8. Museum of Fine Arts, Boston.

The gaze, knowledge and power

   In the 1961 the philosopher Michel Foucault published the first of a
   series of influential books about how dominance, power and control is
   organized within Western society and thought since the seventeenth
   century. Madness and Civilisation, recognized as an intellectual
   milestone when it came out, dealt with the new phenomenon of
   incarceration of abnormals that occurred in the ‘age of reason’ after
   the Middle Ages.

   Foucault’s reasoning seems almost self-evident: for the idea of reason
   to hold sway it required qualifying contrast with an opposite,
   unreason. But unreason could only be defined in terms of what reason
   cannot define.

   Madness was the social typology to fit into reason’s too-hard-basket,
   conflating social misfits and mental illness.

   Foucault followed similar trajectories in his subsequent
   ‘archaeologies’, as he called them, of the clinic and of prisons. The
   birth of the clinic at the beginning of the nineteenth century was
   coterminous with the system of diagnosis in which doctors came to enjoy
   special privileges based on their ability to discriminate, to see the
   signs that erred from good health.

   In Discipline and Punish, Foucault focused on the prison reform of
   Jeremy Bentham, the inventor of the panopticon, an architectural device
   of surveillance that exposed prisoners to an omnipresent gaze.

   After the student riots in May 1968, Foucault’s questions about the
   substance of power and who wields it gained in momentum. ‘Who owns the
   gaze?’. The owner of power and knowledge.

   Yet power and knowledge can never be said to have their permanent
   source in one quality or thing. This means that whilst it is important
   to locate the gaze in order to determine the locus of power, the holder
   of the gaze is neither reducible to that power, nor is he or she ever
   in complete possession of it.

   Power and the gaze for Foucault is a configuration like a kaleidoscope:
   any discernible pattern is one among many; the pattern changes, along
   with the effect. ‘The question of power remains a total enigma’ says
   Foucault. Power is ‘not in the hands of those who govern’, and
   governance itself is a ‘fluid’ notion. ‘It is often difficult to say
   who holds power in a precise sense, but it is easy to see who lacks
   power’.

   Las Meninas, 1656 (detail) by Diego Velázquez. Photograph: The Gallery
   Collection/Corbis. Via The Guardian

   Foucault’s insight that power is fundamentally irreducibile finds its
   equivalent in art in his examination of Velasquez’s Las Meninas (1656)
   that opens Les Mots et les choses (1966, translated as The Order of
   Things). He draws our attention to the reflections of King Philip IV
   and his spouse in the mirror at the rear of the room.

   Their blurred image serves Foucault’s thesis perfectly: the ruler’s
   presence is only a reflection, and so, being a painting, a
   representation within a representation, stands outside of the picture,
   a mere shadow.

   Meanwhile it is the artist—working on a painting we cannot see or
   perhaps the painting we are now seeing, and who gazes directly at
   us—that has the greatest presence, signifying a possession of the gaze
   made possible through artistic invention. The sources of power in this
   picture find themselves continually displaced: for Velasquez the
   artist, because it is mediated through representing self-presentation
   (becoming both subject and object), and for the king and queen, through
   a double mediation which drives home the truth that the king’s power is
   bestowed by his subjects.

   The power of each is interdependent and finite; like the king, the
   artist’s power depends on the viewer’s recognition.

   The idea that power is everywhere and nowhere has a potentially
   destabilizing effect on foundational philosophies such as Marxism and
   positivism, and consequently excited bitter antagonism, preeminently in
   the German Hegelian Jürgen Habermas for whom power’s indeterminacy in
   Foucault’s thought only defers efforts to discourage solutions to
   power’s abuses.

The Postcolonial and Postfeminist gaze

   Once Foucault’s critique of the centralization of power in the modern
   age is applied to the Western male Orientalist, it raises a gamut of
   apposite yet thorny questions.

   Who has ownership of the gaze and what are its entitlements? If an
   indigenous society happens to approve of an outsider’s vision of them,
   artistic or otherwise, does their chorus of opinion make it right? Can
   a woman have the male gaze?

   If you resemble the peoples of one culture and grow up in another
   (Indians in England, Turks in Germany, Chinese in Australia, Koreans in
   the U.S.) does this give you a special advance on your access to the
   culture whence your family came? To what extent does identifying with a
   culture have to do with genetic material?

   In the absence of sure answers, these questions and others crave
   reassessment on a periodic basis. In stable countries, identity is the
   catchcry for artists and curators who fear the scourges of
   globalization.

   Whereas the Orientalist gaze of a superior us seeing an inferior them,
   there is now as much the case of a ‘me’ seeing my own for the
   delectation of a curious ‘them’. While many artists who identify with
   minorities make worthwhile statements of what it means to feel
   oppressed and subjected, just as many use parts of their background
   because it has become fashionable to do so and lubricates their
   possibilities to get into exhibitions; for there is never a shortage of
   exhibitions that sentimentalize identity.

   As events since the Cold War have shown, the imperial impulse has not
   abated, especially evident in the tergiversations of American foreign
   policy.

   Yet America and Western Europe’s ability to dominate other nations is
   sporadic and its inadequacies expose their local agendas and patchy
   cultural understandings.

   Nations under the weight of gratitude to international aid—for damage
   that imperialism has wrought in the first place—such as many in Africa
   can still be said to have what Homi Bhaba has called ‘the threatened
   return of the look’, a gaze that, while subjected, is still forcefully
   active as reproach.

   Karina Eileras develops this notion with reference to the images by
   Marc Garanger, photographer for the French army in 1960-2 at the time
   of the Algerian revolution. In the photographs of women who submitted
   to being photographed, Eileras notices a healthy pattern of tacit
   resistance in covert markers such as pursed lips, uneven deportment,
   skewed looks, all signs of displaced submission.

   A photograph of an Algerian woman in a French regroupment village.
   1960. Marc Garanger. Via TIME

   Attentive analyses like hers are helpful in exposing the lack of
   neutrality of the image, and the way that the gaze can intercepted and
   deflected in a way that does not combat the West’s way of gazing,
   (which, so the theory goes, would only duplicate its negative
   power-play) but rather in a manner that comes at it from the back door.

   But speaking on behalf of the Western white male, can there be said to
   be a post-Orientalist gaze? This image, Affliction of the Protestant
   (2005), by Phillip George indicates that the question can be answered
   in the affirmative.

   Affliction of the Protestant. By Phillip George. 2005.

   George has captured three black hawk helicopters hovering over a mosque
   under construction thereby deftly repositioning his own cultural
   baggage as a Western observer through the visual decoy of observing the
   considerably more dominant eye of the U.S. observing the East.

   This is amplified by the work’s colour, the eerie emerald monochrome of
   night vision, a metaphor for the covert intrusiveness of military
   surveillance. The title considers the Western ignorance toward Muslims
   as more illness than attitude.

   This and this next work reveal the lengths that artists go to combat
   the tortured legacy of the Orientalist gaze. The two stills below are
   from the two channel video installation, Turbulent (1998), by the
   U.S.-Iranian artist Shirin Neshat (b. 1957). It is a poetic yet
   disturbing work that singularly recasts the stereotypical position of
   the mute Muslim woman.

   Shirin Neshat – Turbulent, 1998, black-and-white video installation.
   Via Public Delivery

   Shirin Neshat – Turbulent, 1998, black-and-white video installation.
   Via Public Delivery

   The work opens with a moving song from a man in a white shirt; facing
   him on the opposite screen is the back of a woman clad entirely in
   black. When he finishes, the woman turns and begins her own song, a
   plaintive, wordless lament.

   During each song words roll over the images, for the man in Latin and
   English, for the woman, Arabic and Persian, enforcing the dichotomy.
   The man, who is in the company of a male audience, sings in an
   illuminated room, whereas the woman, alone, sings in darkness.

   Neshat drew inspiration for this work from a blind girl performing in
   the street in Istanbul, which made her reflect on Iran’s disregard for
   female expression, since under the Khommeni regime, women were
   expressly forbidden from performing.

   For all its profound references, when physically experienced, Turbulent
   lives up to its title; when he finishes his song, a quizzical
   expression appears on the man’s face as he ‘watches’ the woman takes
   her turn on the opposite screen.

   The wordless hymn is like a desperately sad chant welling up from out
   of a crack in a hard surface, be it the barrier of Western expectations
   or the wall of male laws. Even with her eyes closed, we as viewers
   nevertheless feel the weight of her gaze, as some form of corrective to
   delinquent Western assumptions about what Middle Eastern women are, or
   should be.

The Prosthetic gaze

   With the invention of photography came a whole new kind of observer, as
   well as an eruption of conjecture about pictorial truth and evidence.
   ‘Evidential’ is a stock term in photography to designate a category
   rather than an essential quality. Critics of photography rightly
   observe that its truth is qualitative: photographic truth.

   The French word for the photographic negative, cliché, is a convenient
   place to start when thinking of the uses to which the photographic
   apparatus (analogue and digital both) is commonly put. Surely we too
   have at one point set out to make a good photograph—seeing in terms of
   an anticipated outcome—rather than just plainly seeing.

   The apparatus determines to varying degrees what and how things are
   seen—this will be explored more in the next chapter.

   As we have seen already, it is hard if not impossible to locate the
   gaze when it is refracted through a mediating lens whose power to
   augment is at the expense of less perceptible constraints and
   limitations.

   Take the touristic gaze: the camera renders the gaze passive; the gaze
   is annulled for the sake of the static reproduction: the event in situ
   exists for the sake of the dour replica.

   But when we think of two films about photographic vision, Hitchcock’s
   Rear Window (1954) or Antonioni’s Blow-Up (1966), the prosthetic gaze
   of the camera is the defining element in what is seen and understood,
   which singles out the unassailable fact that each are films from the
   first, a medium with its own particular forms of orchestration,
   manipulation and deception.

   In a pioneering work of performance art, Following Piece (1969), Vito
   Acconci had himself photographed randomly following people in the
   streets of New York.

   Following Piece (1969). Vito Acconci. Via MoMA

   At first, we are carried along by the ebb and flow of the images’
   ongoing movement determined by the trajectory of the people whom the
   artist is following. We initially assume that it is Acconci who is the
   owner of the gaze, but it quickly dawns on us that his gaze is solely
   at the behest of whom he follows.

   Since he has no other motive but to follow them, it is they who possess
   the gaze; the artist’s surveillance trick sustains itself only upon the
   act of pursuit.

   We too are complicit in this arbitrary magnetic game, since we are the
   only ones who gaze upon both pursuer and pursued. But—to end the
   loop—the artist has intended this to happen, so by default he has the
   last laugh, binding us up in his work’s logic. Everyone is the object
   of another’s gaze, none escape it.

   These shifts and gaps are what caused Jacques Derrida to write Droit de
   regards (‘right of inspection’, or ‘right to gaze) written to accompany
   the photographs by Marie-Françoise Plissart. Plissart’s suite of images
   half-narrates a story involving lesbians, a child in commedia dell’arte
   make-up and finally an interloping male.

   I say ‘half-narrates’ because what preoccupies Derrida are the lacunae,
   the mid-spaces that force the viewer’s assumptions. The kinds of
   transactions that occur within the images convolute the
   self-consciousness of the gaze.

   In other words, we do not know in what capacity we look—as man or
   woman—and whether we are entitled to look at all or at what. Derrida
   goes so far as to claim that the photographs are neither referential
   nor evidential but rather embody a wish, they are symbols or phantoms
   of what we want to see but is not ‘really’ there.

   Taking up from Lacan, Sartre and Merleau-Ponty, Derrida’s ambling
   excursus, also with its implicit subtexts of stock photographic theory
   and from French poetics, is more memorable than the photographs
   themselves. He locates a critical area in which the gaze is fractured
   and multi-layered.

The global and sci-fi techno-gaze

   When we get to cyberspace this split of the gaze is constant and
   intricate. There is a chain of mediations whose source is difficult if
   not impossible to locate. With Spyware, surveillance, intrusion takes
   on a new and sinister face.

   The gaze can become small and local and, in the next breath,
   macrocosmic and global, as with Google Earth which is a commercial
   offshoot of ‘Digital Earth’.

   The ‘Digital Earth’ project as it has come to be named was an
   initiative of Al Gore begun in 1998 via NASA and was envisioned to
   bring together disparate communities, a ‘grassroots effort’ as Gore
   described it that would be the next great innovation of the web. It was
   part of the deregulation of digital technologies in the 1990s designed
   to stimulate a range of economic and social activities.

   But consonant again with technology that vaunts itself too strongly as
   progressive (utopian?), its present uses are markedly different from
   initially intended. As would maybe be expected, the outcome is
   decidedly cynical. Digital Earth technology serves the corporate
   entities that made the technology possible from the start, for the
   viewer will always be part of the network, absorbed within it like a
   worker bee within a hive.

   As Lisa Parks remarks in her essay on this subject, the promise of
   recentralization obscures a media infrastructure which is itself
   decentralized. Whereas the models that Digital Earth propagates are
   linear and smooth, the spaces it traverses are not. It proposes to
   reduce a domain that encompasses the social, global, inner, outer,
   local and national, corporate and individual, to a common denominator.

   As Parks asserts, Digital Earth conceals the struggles taking place
   within the world and ‘instead naturalizes these spaces as the rightful
   property of the spectator/navigator’.

   The viewer assumes false ownership of the world with the help of
   interfaces like Work Bench which enable anyone to zoom in and twirl the
   world at will. In short the viewer is lulled into a false sense of
   agency with the power to lord over the hemisphere like a pagan god,
   when in reality he or she is dupe to the medium, where the distinctions
   between real and virtual are obscured forever.

   These prostheses of the gaze end up becoming imperceptibly incorporated
   within the gaze. We cannot imagine an alternative, believing ourselves
   bereft, incapacitated or non-functional without them.
     __________________________________________________________________

Further Reading

   Apter, Emily, ‘The Garden of Scopic Perversion from Monet to Mirbeau’,
   October 47, 1988.

   Ashton, Dore, Rosa Bonheur: A Life and a Legend, London, Secker and
   Warburg, 1981.

   Benjamin, Roger, Orientalist Aesthetics: Art, Colonialism and French
   North Africa, 1880-1930, Berkeley and London, California U.P., 2003.

   Bhaba, Homi, The Location of Culture, London and New York, Routledge,
   1994.

   Bowie, Malcolm, Lacan, London, Fontana, 1991.

   Butler, Judith, gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of
   Identity, New York and London, Routledge, 1990.

   Cannadine, Ornamentalism: How the British Saw Their Empire, Oxford,
   Oxford U.P., 2001.

   Caplan, Jay, Framed Narratives: Diderot’s Genealogy of the Beholder,
   Manchester, Manchester U.P., 1986.

   Descombes, Vincent, Modern French Philosophy (1979), trans. L.
   Scott-Fox and J. M. Harding, Cambridge, Cambridge U.P., 1980.

   Fauconnier, Bernard, Cézanne, Paris, Gallimard, 2006.

   Ferguson, Frances, Solitude and the Sublime: Romanticism and the
   aesthetics of Individuation, New York and London, Routledge, 1992.

   Foucault, Michel, Politics, Philosophy, Culture: Interviews and Other
   Writings, 1977-1984, ed. Lawrence Kritzman, trans. Alan Sheridan et.
   al., London, Routledge, 1988.

   Geczy, Adam, ‘Phillip George: Night Vision and the Post-Oriental’, Art
   Asia Pacific, 47, 2005.

   Irigaray, Luce, Speculum, Paris, Minuit, 1974.

   Garb, Tamar, Bodies of Modernity: Figures and Flesh in Fin-de-siècle
   France, London, Thames and Hudson, 1998.

   Grosz, Elizabeth, Sexual Subversions, Sydney, Allen and Unwin, 1989.

   Kemp, Martin, Behind the Picture. Art and Evidence min the Italian
   Renaissance, New Haven and London, Yale U.P., 1997.

   Lacan, Jacques, Ecrits I & II, Paris, Seuil, 1966.

   Lynn, Victoria, Voiceovers, exn cat., Sydney, Art Gallery of New South
   Wales, 1999.

   Mehlman, Jeffrey, Walter Benjamin for Children. An Essay on His Radio
   Years, Chicago and London, Chicago U.P., 1993.

   Merleau-Ponty, Maurice, ‘Cézanne’s doubt’, Sense and Non-Sense (1948),
   trans. Hubert Dreyfus and Patricia Allen Dreyfus, Northwestern U.P.,
   1964.

   Moore-Gilbert, Bart, Postcolonial Theory, London and New York, Verso,
   1997.

   Pollock, Griselda, Cassatt, painter of Modern Women, London, Thames and
   Hudson, 1998.

   Rajchman, John, ‘Foucault’s Art of Seeing’, Philosophical Events, New
   York, Columbia U.P., 1991.

   Rewald, John, Studies in Post-Impressionism, New York, Abrams, 1986.

   Rhodes, Colin, Primitivism and Modern Art, London, Thames and Hudson,
   1994.

   Ross, Christine, ‘Vision and Insufficiency at the turn of the
   Millenium: Rosemarie Trockel’s Distracted Eye’, October, 96, Spring
   2001.

   Said, Culture and Imperialism, London, Chatto and Windus, 1993.

   Whitford, Margaret, Luce Irigaray: Philosophy in the Feminine, London,
   Routledge, 1991.
   Adam Geczy

   Artist, Educator and Writer… I'm a dedicated teacher, currently
   lecturing at Sydney College of the Arts, Australia. I have exhibited
   extensively in Europe, across Australia and in Asia in a variety of
   media, from painting to video and installation. As a writer, I have
   authored numerous critical articles and essays and has published some
   20 books.

   Previous
   Previous

What can Adorno & Walter Benjamin Teach us About NFTs & Art

   Next
   Next

Monet and the Impressionists

   © Adam Geczy 2021 | About | Blog | Contact | Privacy | Terms﻿
