   #alternate

   IFRAME: https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-NX5LSK3

   Skip to main content

   The New Yorker

     * Newsletter

   (BUTTON) Search

     * The Latest
     * News
     * Books & Culture
     * Fiction & Poetry
     * Humor & Cartoons
     * Magazine
     * Puzzles & Games
     * Video
     * Podcasts
     * Goings On
     * Shop
     * 100th Anniversary

   (BUTTON) Open Navigation Menu
   The New Yorker

   Second Read

The Invention of “the Male Gaze”

   In 1973, the film theorist Laura Mulvey used concepts from
   psychoanalysis to forge a feminist polemic and a lasting shorthand for
   gender dynamics onscreen.
   By Lauren Michele Jackson
   July 14, 2023
   Profile of a man's head with overlapping circle around the brain. In
   the center an eye with a film reel for a pupil.
   Illustration by David Vanadia
   (BUTTON) Save this story
   (BUTTON) Save this story

   I was probably in college when I first learned that movies could
   commandeer my desires in a manner hostile to my flourishing as a woman.
   My favorite film at the time was “Sin City,” a 2005 neo-noir adapted
   from Frank Miller’s graphic-novel series of the same name. The men were
   smoking hot, fuelling my nascent infatuation with Clive Owen and Bruce
   Willis and even, maybe, in some corner of my psyche, the comeback
   bruiser Mickey Rourke. But, as in many a noir, the women provided much
   of the spectacle. There was Alexis Bledel playing to type as a
   blue-eyed Bambi named Becky; Carla Gugino as a parole officer with a
   high ass in a gauzy robe; Brittany Murphy, a pouty waitress draped in a
   lover’s starched white shirt; Devon Aoki, a gorgeously mum assassin;
   Rosario Dawson, lethally beautiful sheathed in leather; Jessica Alba
   gyrating in chaps. Their characters were assembled from new and old
   Hollywood types—dizzy dames, femmes fatales, “strong female
   leads”—neither capitulating to those codes, exactly, nor revolting
   against them. A winking, pulpy pastiche by design, “Sin City” (directed
   by Miller and Robert Rodriguez) replicated with gusto a cinematic genre
   that made a tradition out of sublimating its anxieties about womankind
   via sultry, duplicitous characters. In one shot, the male narrator
   broods in the background while a fish-netted rear end belonging to no
   character in particular fills the foreground. What is that ass doing
   there? Where does it exist within the space of the story? And if it’s
   there to court our appreciation, who does it think we are?

   Men, possibly. Often, these days, we confront such questions by
   invoking the concept of “the male gaze.” The term was popularized,
   fifty years ago, by the British film theorist Laura Mulvey, who wrote,
   in a 1973 essay called “Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema,” of how
   the “male gaze projects its fantasy onto the female figure, which is
   styled accordingly.” Mulvey sought to break down the mechanics of
   looking to expose how cinematic conventions reinforce patriarchal
   fantasy, a task that she believed “called out for the vocabulary and
   the concepts of psychoanalysis.” At the time, the work of the
   mid-century French psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan was de rigueur in cinema
   studies. His concept of the gaze posited that the act of looking was
   fundamental to the development of one’s identity. An infant, during
   what Lacan calls the “mirror stage,” achieves self-mastery by communing
   with his or her own reflection; in the cinema, the theory went,
   something similar happened as spectators formed a sense of
   identification with the figures that they watched onscreen. Before
   Lacan, Sigmund Freud had argued in his essays on infantile sexuality
   that looking conferred a voyeuristic pleasure, Schaulust (or, in its
   Greek approximation, “scopophilia”). These two ways of looking seemed
   in some senses at odds: in the former case, the subject understands
   herself via the image reflected back at her; in the latter, she takes
   pleasure objectifying whatever, or whomever, she sees.

   Yet Mulvey argued that cinema, in fact, reconciles this tension, by
   consolidating both kinds of looking within the consuming of a
   particular kind of fantasy image. In a darkened theatre, our compulsory
   gaze is in reflexive sympathy with the camera’s interests and our
   pleasure stirred by the human forms onscreen, some of whom seem posed
   for our perusal. Those figures, Mulvey noticed, are often female; like
   that ass in “Sin City,” they are there not to participate in the
   narrative so much as to adorn it. This cinematic world does not operate
   in a void, of course. It is, Mulvey writes, “subject to the law which
   produces it”—that is, the rules of the surrounding society shape what
   we watch. So it is no coincidence that cinematic images tend to
   replicate gender as patriarchy sees it, reinforcing a classic division
   between passive femininity and active masculinity—the
   “to-be-looked-at-ness eroticism” of, say, Marlene Dietrich’s famous
   legs in the 1930 film “Morocco” versus the heroic wanderlust of her
   co-star, Gary Cooper. As John Berger wrote in his own analysis of the
   masculine gaze in visual art, from the 1972 book “Ways of Seeing”
   (adapted from the BBC series of the same name), “One might simplify
   this by saying: men act and women appear.” Sometimes, Mulvey later
   wrote, “the female spectator may feel so out of key with the pleasure
   on offer, with its ‘masculinisation’, that the spell of fascination is
   broken.” But often enough, as for me with “Sin City,” the spell holds.

   Though Mulvey’s essay analyzed the work of specific directors—Alfred
   Hitchcock’s masterfully subjective camera in “Vertigo,” for
   instance—she was not preoccupied with any one technician or viewer so
   much as with the technological process by which gender dynamics are
   asserted onscreen and alchemized through the pleasure of spectators.
   The way bodies are framed, and the way the camera moves, teaches us to
   look at women the way that patriarchy already does. Over time, Mulvey’s
   theory of the male gaze became an obligatory citation for works of
   feminist film criticism. As the critics Janet Bergstrom and Mary Ann
   Doane put it, any scholar who came afterward “felt compelled to situate
   herself in relation.” It also became a favorite shorthand for works of
   mainstream criticism seeking to critique how gender plays out in film
   and television. (According to one reviewer, Sam Levinson’s tepidly
   provocative new HBO series “The Idol,” about a pop star who bares all,
   “screams the male gaze.”) Various films in recent years, such as Steven
   Soderbergh’s male-stripper trilogy “Magic Mike” and Céline Sciamma’s
   lesbian period piece “Portrait of a Lady on Fire,” have prompted a
   parallel preoccupation with “the female gaze,” broadly defined as a
   humane courting of the pleasure of women viewers. But, as other critics
   have pointed out, when applied too broadly that term can obscure rather
   than illuminate. The New Yorker’s Emily Nussbaum wrote in a review of
   the 2016 Amazon series “I Love Dick,” adapted from Chris Kraus’s
   experimental feminist novel, that the term “female gaze” had become
   “blunt” from overuse, “particularly with its essentialist hint that
   women share one eye: a vision that is circular, mucky, menstrual,
   intimate, wise.” Contrary to Mulvey’s approach, uses of the “gaze”
   today—be it the male gaze, the white gaze, the straight gaze, and so
   forth—seem more invested in matters of identity than in the project of
   aesthetic analysis. They want to name who is doing the looking rather
   than how. (No wonder Cate Blanchett, in an interview for the 2015 live
   adaptation of “Cinderella,” misheard a question about the “Disney
   villain gaze” as “Disney villian gays.”)

   What too often gets elided from current gaze talk is the possibility of
   looking as an act of ambivalence. As Frantz Fanon wrote in “Black Skin,
   White Masks,” his psychoanalytic study of colonialism, even the
   oppressor’s gaze can be a site of uncertainty; no one’s viewpoint—or
   projection—is entirely secure. In a 1989 critique of mainstream film
   criticism, bell hooks turned her attention to the previously ignored
   experience of the Black female spectator. Alienated by the exclusionary
   and racist fantasies of Hollywood cinema, Black women developed their
   own way of looking, in which a critical awareness of stereotypes
   preëmpted any straightforward identification with the mammies or tragic
   mulattas onscreen. One did not acquire this “oppositional gaze,” as
   hooks called it, by virtue of being Black and female; rather, one
   cultivated it through the tug and pull of resisting dominant ways of
   looking. Mulvey, in that sense, like other film theorists of the time,
   had made too much of the idea that cinematic images could impose a
   point of view.

   In the introduction to a 1989 collection of her essays, “Visual and
   Other Pleasures,” Mulvey wrote that her essay on the male gaze had
   erupted from the ecstatic feminist thinking of its time. Feminists of
   the seventies understood the political utility of a polemic. Mulvey, in
   that spirit, had forfeited a degree of nuance, she noted; any
   revisitation of her essay should consider it part of the “historical
   moment” rather than as a concept made to last. But Mulvey’s essay also
   had a forward-looking bent that gets overlooked when present-day
   critics invoke the “male gaze” as a cudgel. A lifelong cinephile and a
   filmmaker herself, Mulvey saw in the emerging independent filmmaking of
   the sixties and seventies an opportunity for cinema to detach itself
   from the patriarchal conventions and monied priorities of Hollywood.
   Invoking directors of the avant-garde including Hollis Frampton and
   Chantal Akerman, Mulvey called for the “birth of a cinema which is
   radical in both a political and aesthetic sense.”

   What remains invigorating about Mulvey’s essay, above all, is its
   interest in the capacity of psychoanalysis to teach us new ways of
   looking. Film theorists who return to Lacan have pointed out that even
   he did not treat the gaze as a site of clear-cut self-knowledge. The
   film professor Todd McGowan, in a 2003 article called “Looking for the
   Gaze,” revisited Lacan’s reading of the Hans Holbein the Younger
   painting “The Ambassadors,” in “The Seminar Book XI: The Four
   Fundamental Concepts of Psychoanalysis.” The large-scale work shows two
   men, one richly garbed and another in religious dress, leaned against a
   table stuffed with objects. A memento mori in the lower third of the
   canvas looks different from different points of view—from head on it
   appears as a mere smudge, but from the high-right or lower left the
   shape becomes a skull—courting an active exchange between viewer and
   art object. When we look, Lacan wrote, “something slips, passes, is
   transmitted, from stage to stage, and is always to some degree eluded
   in it.”

   In a book published this spring, “A Black Gaze,” Tina M. Campt, a Black
   feminist theorist of visual culture at Princeton, picks up that strain
   in Lacan’s thinking. The gaze as she presents it is not another
   decisive site of power; it is not a diagnosis or a settled definition.
   (“My choice of the indefinite article is intentional,” she writes, of
   the book’s title.) She is interested, rather, in how different art
   works—she cites, for instance, Arthur Jafa’s quotidian video
   assemblages or Deana Lawson’s boldly intimate photographic portraits of
   Black life—set new terms for an active and varied engagement between
   the viewer and the visual. Like Mulvey’s essay, Campt’s book is
   forward-looking, exhorting us to “think beyond our comfort zone,”
   toward something new and speculative.

   There is a sketch from Terence Nance’s kaleidoscopic HBO comedy series,
   “Random Acts of Flyness,” that enlivens possibility. It opens with Jon
   Hamm slouched on the couch in front of a TV set; in voice-over, we hear
   him ask, “Do you suffer from white thoughts?” We are watching an
   infomercial for a topical sludge called White Be Gone that promises to
   eliminate racial prejudice from the psyche, with Hamm as both
   spokesperson and patient. On the TV set, footage of political protests
   is playing. He mutters, “Violence isn’t the answer” and thinks, “All
   lives matter?” before another besuited Hamm poofs into view behind him
   and rubs White Be Gone on his temples. But soon the perspective shifts:
   we are watching not the final version of the infomercial but its
   filming. Hamm takes a beat to sidebar with the Black director,
   insisting that he is “not white white,” like the target audience of the
   product. The infomercial resumes—“ ‘I’m not racist’ spoken out loud is
   a classic white thought,” Hamm explains to the camera—but a minute
   later the perspective shifts again: we are in Nance’s workspace, where
   what we’ve just seen is revealed to be a rough cut of a sketch perhaps
   intended for the very program we are watching. As Nance edits the piece
   on his computer, he receives a text message from a friend who has
   viewed the sketch and has some feedback: “it seems to me that as
   ARTISTS we should be addressing whiteness less… and affirming Blackness
   more.” The scene ends with Nance texting back, “You right…”

   A frictionless interpretation of the sketch would home in on its
   critique of whiteness. We’re meant to be amused by the ailing soul who
   professes, as Hamm does, “I’m not racist!” But is this a parody of
   whiteness or a parody of the critique? Should the viewer sympathize
   with Nance’s preliminary sketch or his friend’s final feedback? Each
   scene upends viewers’ positions and redoubles our sense of doubt.
   Rather than making us feel known, the sketch makes us feel ashamed of
   our self-assurance. It is not an unpleasurable experience. As we can
   glean from Lacan, sometimes it is useful to feel the gaze turned back
   at you. ♦

New Yorker Favorites

     * The best movies, books, TV shows, albums, jokes, and podcasts of
       2025.
     * The French con man who impersonated more than a dozen fictional
       children.
     * When an Ivy League school turned against a student.
     * How to cycle like a Dutchman.
     * The day the dinosaurs died.
     * The brothers behind Warner Bros.

   Sign up for our daily newsletter to receive the best stories from The
   New Yorker.
   Lauren Michele Jackson, a contributing writer at The New Yorker, is an
   assistant professor of English at Northwestern University and the
   author of “White Negroes.”
   More:PsychoanalysisCinemaFilmsGenderBooksFeminism

   Read More
   Two New Movies Revivify the Portrait-Film Genre
   The Front Row
   Two New Movies Revivify the Portrait-Film Genre
   Two New Movies Revivify the Portrait-Film Genre
   Documentaries about individuals are ubiquitous, but “Suburban Fury” and
   “Put Your Soul on Your Hand and Walk” explore the filmmaker-subject
   relationship in ways that recall classics of the form.
   “Wake Up Dead Man”: A Murder Mystery with God in the Details
   The Current Cinema
   “Wake Up Dead Man”: A Murder Mystery with God in the Details
   “Wake Up Dead Man”: A Murder Mystery with God in the Details
   In Rian Johnson’s latest whodunnit, Josh O’Connor plays a Catholic
   priest trying to restore moral order at a church befouled by murder.
   “Train Dreams” Is Too Tidy to Go Off the Rails
   The Current Cinema
   “Train Dreams” Is Too Tidy to Go Off the Rails
   “Train Dreams” Is Too Tidy to Go Off the Rails
   In Clint Bentley’s adaptation of a Denis Johnson novella, Joel Edgerton
   plays a builder of bridges who finds himself increasingly cut off from
   the modern world.
   2025 Was David Lynch
   2025 in Review
   2025 Was David Lynch
   2025 Was David Lynch
   The filmmaker, who died in January, showed us what our world was
   becoming, and how we should respond.
   “Marty Supreme” ’s Megawatt Personality
   The Current Cinema
   “Marty Supreme” ’s Megawatt Personality
   “Marty Supreme” ’s Megawatt Personality
   In Josh Safdie’s hectic new film, Timothée Chalamet plays a gifted
   Ping-Pong player who’s also a born performer.
   What to Read Before Your Trip to Atropia
   Book Currents
   What to Read Before Your Trip to Atropia
   What to Read Before Your Trip to Atropia
   Hailey Benton Gates, the director of the “military-industrial-complex
   romantic comedy” “Atropia,” recommends a few books that share a kinship
   with her new film, about actors working in a fake village where U.S.
   soldiers train.
   Bi Gan’s Dream Factory
   Persons of Interest
   Bi Gan’s Dream Factory
   Bi Gan’s Dream Factory
   With “Resurrection,” the director has made a surrealist epic not just
   about Chinese history but about the cinema itself.
   “Avatar: Fire and Ash” Mostly Treads Water
   The Current Cinema
   “Avatar: Fire and Ash” Mostly Treads Water
   “Avatar: Fire and Ash” Mostly Treads Water
   In James Cameron’s latest 3-D science-fiction extravaganza, the Na’vi
   family tree gets more complicated, but our sense of wonderment flattens
   out.
   Rob Reiner Made a New Kind of Fairy Tale
   Postscript
   Rob Reiner Made a New Kind of Fairy Tale
   Rob Reiner Made a New Kind of Fairy Tale
   The director’s great achievement was placing real people, with real
   senses of humor, into the fantasies of mass culture.
   “The Secret Agent” Is a Political Thriller Teeming with Life
   The Current Cinema
   “The Secret Agent” Is a Political Thriller Teeming with Life
   “The Secret Agent” Is a Political Thriller Teeming with Life
   The Brazilian director Kleber Mendonça Filho conjures fateful
   interconnections among vivid characters living in the grip of military
   dictatorship.
   “Father Mother Sister Brother” Explores the Mysteries of Family Life
   The Front Row
   “Father Mother Sister Brother” Explores the Mysteries of Family Life
   “Father Mother Sister Brother” Explores the Mysteries of Family Life
   Jim Jarmusch’s three-part drama, set in New Jersey, Dublin, and Paris,
   casts such notables as Adam Driver and Cate Blanchett in wry, ironic
   probes of grown children’s relationships with their parents.
   What the Warner Bros. Sale Means for the Art of Movies
   The Front Row
   What the Warner Bros. Sale Means for the Art of Movies
   What the Warner Bros. Sale Means for the Art of Movies
   The competition between Netflix and Paramount Skydance to acquire the
   studio is haunted by the ghosts of mergers past.

   The New Yorker
   The New Yorker

     * News
     * Books & Culture
     * Fiction & Poetry
     * Humor & Cartoons
     * Magazine
     * Crossword
     * Video
     * Podcasts
     * 100th Anniversary
     * Goings On

     * Manage Account
     * Shop The New Yorker
     * Buy Covers and Cartoons
     * Condé Nast Store
     * Digital Access
     * Newsletters
     * Jigsaw Puzzle
     * RSS
     * Site Map

     * About
     * Careers
     * Contact
     * F.A.Q.
     * Media Kit
     * Press
     * Accessibility Help
     * User Agreement
     * Privacy Policy
     * Your California Privacy Rights

   © 2025 Condé Nast. All rights reserved. The New Yorker may earn a
   portion of sales from products that are purchased through our site as
   part of our Affiliate Partnerships with retailers. The material on this
   site may not be reproduced, distributed, transmitted, cached or
   otherwise used, except with the prior written permission of Condé Nast.
   Ad Choices
     *
     *
     *
     *
     *
     *
     *
