   Customers

     * Actors + Performers
     * Creators

The Male Gaze: A Full Guide to Its Effect on Art and Society

   By Alicia Lutes | August 14, 2024
   Article Image
   Photo Source: “Birds of Prey” Credit: Claudette Barius

   You’ve no doubt heard of the “male gaze”—it has, after all, been the
   backbone of art and entertainment since man first put pen or paint to
   paper. Conversation around the concept has had a particular resurgence
   as modern filmmakers aim to subvert long-held tropes. But what is it,
   exactly? And how can we work against its grip on Hollywood and beyond?
   Read on.

What is the male gaze?

   In the simplest of terms, it is the male point of view as shown
   onscreen. More specifically, it’s the way male storytellers write and
   frame women to service the desires and worldview of men. The male gaze
   has existed in the art world for centuries, but the term itself was
   coined by British film theorist Laura Mulvey in a 1973 essay, “Visual
   Pleasure and Narrative Cinema.” In it, she notes that the “male gaze
   projects its fantasy onto the female figure, which is styled
   accordingly.”

   To understand the concept, you must first acknowledge the context: We
   live in a society that overwhelmingly prioritizes male wants and needs
   as the “average” point of view. (This is also known as patriarchy.)
   Related
   What Is the Bechdel Test? What Is the Bechdel Test?

   “Things as they are and as they have been, in the arts as in a hundred
   other areas, are stultifying, oppressive, and discouraging to all
   those, women among them, who did not have the good fortune to be born
   white, preferably middle-class, and, above all, male,” wrote art critic
   Linda Nochlin in her landmark essay “Why Have There Been No Great Women
   Artists?” “The fault, dear brothers, lies not in our stars, our
   hormones, our menstrual cycles, or our empty internal spaces, but in
   our institutions and our education—education understood to include
   everything that happens to us from the moment we enter this world of
   meaningful symbols, signs, and signals.”

   We see this reflected in our film and television, which has largely
   been written and directed by heterosexual men, for other heterosexual
   men, telling mostly heterosexual mens’ stories. For example, a 2023
   study by the USC Annenberg Inclusion Initiative looked at 1,600
   top-grossing movies from 2007 to 2022 and found that only 88 were
   directed by women. Of the top-grossing films of 2023, the overall
   percentage of women in speaking roles was 35% (down from 37% in 2022),
   and the percentage of movies with female protagonists was 28% (down
   from 33% in 2022).

What does the male gaze look like?

   The male gaze often reduces women to props and set dressing—objects of
   wish fulfillment and lust, no matter their status. Hallmarks include
   close-ups on body parts, framing that accentuates sexuality outside the
   proper context, and slow-motion camera movements (running, bouncing,
   etc.). A 2018 study conducted by Plan International and the Geena Davis
   Institute on Gender in Media found that female characters in a position
   of authority are more likely to be shown in revealing clothing (30%
   versus 7% for male characters). They are also nearly twice as likely to
   appear partially nude (15% versus 8%) and completely nude (2% versus
   0.5%).

   Watch the particularly male gaze-y choices made throughout this
   conversation scene in Michael Bay’s “Transformers” (2007).

   IFRAME: https://www.youtube.com/embed/f6L3Ef1JCC8

   The male gaze isn’t always overtly sexual (just often!). It also comes
   in the form of particularly helpless or passive female characters, as
   evidenced by centuries of the damsel in distress trope. It also
   sometimes looks like a manic pixie dream girl who exists solely to
   further a tragic man’s arc. And it can just mean a male creator
   fundamentally (but confidently) misunderstanding or misrepresenting an
   aspect of the female experience.

   Think of Bryce Dallas Howards’ Claire Dearing keeping her high heels on
   throughout the entirety of Colin Trevorrow’s “Jurassic World” (2015).

   IFRAME: https://www.youtube.com/embed/RF7gE8Iize0

How the male gaze impacts storytelling—and the world

   The male gaze has had a huge impact on the world and storytelling, with
   both influencing the other in equal measure. Its ubiquitousness
   conditions women to adhere to a patriarchal conception of how to look
   and act. Similarly, it reaffirms to men that this is how women should
   be viewed and treated.

   “A woman is always accompanied, except when quite alone, and perhaps
   even then, by her own image of herself. While she is walking across a
   room or weeping at the death of her father, she cannot avoid
   envisioning herself walking or weeping,” said influential critic John
   Berger, speaking on the effect of the male gaze in art. “From earliest
   childhood she is taught and persuaded to survey herself continually.
   She has to survey everything she is and everything she does, because
   how she appears to others—and particularly how she appears to men—is of
   crucial importance for what is normally thought of as the success of
   her life.”
   Related
   How to Become an Actress How to Become an Actress

   By placing women in subservient roles, it subliminally—or
   otherwise—endorses the idea that they are secondary creatures in the
   human hierarchy. A study that looked at award-winning and shortlisted
   Cannes Lions Film and Film craft creative work from 2006 to 2023 found
   that “female characters in 2023 creative work were portrayed as having
   less independence than male characters, particularly in regards to
   occupation and work status.”

How to subvert the male gaze

   In short: Watch more film and television made by and for women! There
   are plenty of ways to get yourself acquainted with the female gaze.
   Directors like Agnès Varda and Céline Sciamma have done brilliant work
   that upends the typical narratives afforded women. Films like Varda’s
   “Cléo From 5 to 7” (1962) and “Lions Love (...and Lies)” (1969), or
   Sciamma’s “Girlhood” (2014), “Portrait of a Lady on Fire” (2019), and
   “Petite Maman” (2021) put the female gaze front and center in a way
   that subverts our more traditional (and therefore traditionally male)
   visual points of view. The more you watch and study, the more you will
   understand the difference.

   “The voice of the male gaze is so loud, it can send a small
   representative to live inside your brain, to tell you what you should
   do, and how you should value yourself, and what actions aren’t worth
   causing a fuss over,” actor Betty Gilpin (“Glow,” “Mrs. Davis”) told
   Harper’s Bazaar. “I think that it’s up to us to kill that
   representative in our own brains. I know I’m trying to do it every day.
   Maybe our granddaughters won’t have it at all.”

   A good starting point is to compare the way Margot Robbie’s Harley
   Quinn is portrayed in David Ayer’s “Suicide Squad” (2016) versus Cathy
   Yan’s “Birds of Prey” (2020). The character’s not only more
   provocatively dressed and framed in the former, but her style and
   actions are all tied back to her relationship with Jared Leto’s Joker.
   (Her shirt throughout the film famously reads “Daddy’s Lil Monster.”)
   In “Birds of Prey,” the way Harley dresses and acts all represent her
   newfound independence.

   IFRAME: https://www.youtube.com/embed/nEYLj_75H64

     * TAGS
     * Actors + Performers
     * Creators
     * Features
     * Acting
     * Directing
     * Screenwriter
     * Film
     * Television

Auditions & Open Casting Calls

     * New York Auditions
     * Los Angeles Auditions
     * London Auditions
     * Auditions for Movies
     * See all Auditions

Featured Calls

     * Social Media Ad
       Makeup Brand UGC Ads - UK
     * Other UGC
       Construction Business Owner UGC
     * Online Commercial / Video Ad
       Major UK Food Brand TikTok Series, Middle Aged Man
     * Search all Calls

More From Acting

   Article Thumbnail

Play Tom Cruise in a 'Top Gun: Maverick' Skit and Earn $2,000 + More New York
Acting Jobs

   December 30, 2025
   Article Thumbnail

A Luxury Real Estate Commercial for Pebble Beach Needs Golfers + More Casting
Calls in Los Angeles

   December 30, 2025
   Article Thumbnail

A Paranormal Investigation Audio Series Needs Talent + More Voiceover Jobs

   December 30, 2025
   Article Thumbnail

Love ‘Survivor’? Apply to These Reality TV Casting Calls

   December 30, 2025
   SEE ALL

More From Directing

   Article Thumbnail

Guillermo del Toro on ‘Frankenstein,’ Directing Advice, and the Powerful
Height Difference Between Oscar Isaac + Jacob Elordi

   December 17, 2025
   Article Thumbnail

Rian Johnson Talks ‘Wake Up Dead Man,’ His Best Directing Advice + Why Josh
O’Connor Is Like Jimmy Stewart

   December 11, 2025
   Article Thumbnail

TikTok Content Ideas to Help You Go Viral

   October 02, 2025
   Article Thumbnail

What Is Film Noir? An Intro to Hollywood’s Heart of Darkness

   September 22, 2025
   SEE ALL

More From Screenwriter

   Article Thumbnail

77th Emmy Awards: Full List of Winners

   September 14, 2025
   Article Thumbnail

What Is a B Movie? A Guide to Cinematic Schlock

   May 29, 2025
   Article Thumbnail

40th Film Independent Spirit Awards: Full List of Winners

   February 22, 2025
   Article Thumbnail

Dramatic, Situational, Verbal: What You Should Know About 3 Types of Irony

   February 10, 2025
   SEE ALL

More From Creators

   Article Thumbnail

Beginner Streamer Setups: Here’s What You Need

   December 23, 2025
   Article Thumbnail

The 8 Best Livestreaming Platforms for Creators

   December 22, 2025
   Article Thumbnail

Ready for ‘Euphoria’ Season 3? Apply to These Gigs

   December 12, 2025
   Article Thumbnail

How to Make a Great How-To Video in 5 Simple Steps

   December 08, 2025
   SEE ALL

Recommended

   Recommended Article Thumbnail

Lyndie Greenwood Finds Strength in ‘Sleepy Hollow’

   January 10, 2017
   Recommended Article Thumbnail

Alexander Skarsgård Is Still Looking for Answers

   June 20, 2013
   Recommended Article Thumbnail

6 Acting Insights From 'Geography Club' Star Justin Deeley

   November 15, 2013
   Recommended Article Thumbnail

Corey Stoll Goes Larger Than Life in ‘Ant-Man’

   July 15, 2015

Now Trending

   Trending Article Thumbnail

How to Get Cast on the ‘I’m Glad My Mom Died’ Series Adaptation

   July 15, 2025
   Trending Article Thumbnail

How Lou de Laâge Prepared to Play a Prima Ballerina on ‘Étoile’

   May 05, 2025
   Trending Article Thumbnail

A 1990s-Set Netflix Film Needs Talent + Other Background Casting Calls

   December 24, 2025
   Trending Article Thumbnail

The 20 Greatest Directors of All Time

   August 19, 2025
   Trending Article Thumbnail

Love Hallmark Movies? Apply to These Holiday Gigs

   December 24, 2025
   Trending Article Thumbnail

The Duffer Brothers Always Knew How ‘Stranger Things’ Would End

   November 27, 2025
   Trending Article Thumbnail

How to Get Cast on ‘St. Denis Medical’

   April 11, 2025
   Trending Article Thumbnail

Now Casting: Earn $7,000 for a Short Romance Drama + 3 More Gigs

   December 12, 2025

   IFRAME: //www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-WBMS2S
