   #Medium alternate

   Sitemap
   Open in app

   (BUTTON) Sign up

   Sign in
   Medium Logo
   ____________________
   Write
   Search

   (BUTTON) Sign up

   Sign in
   (BUTTON)

   The Festember Blog
   ·

   The Festember Blog

   The official creative outlet of Festember, the inter college cultural,
   literary and arts extravaganza of NIT, Trichy. Subscribe to look at the
   world through a unique looking glass, with our thought-provoking and
   fun reads.

The Female Gaze: Why Women In Art Matter

   Raamanujan
   Raamanujan
   9 min read
   ·
   May 27, 2023

   --
   (BUTTON)

   3
   (BUTTON)

   Listen
   (BUTTON)

   Share

     The first feminist gesture is to say: “OK, they’re looking at me.
     But I’m looking at them.” The act of deciding to look, of deciding
     that the world is not defined by how people see me, but how I see
     them.

   These profound words were said by the queen of the French New Wave of
   cinema herself, Agnes Varda. A feminist icon, she was one of the
   pioneers of a flurry of extremely influential French films in the
   1960s. She was, as you might’ve guessed, the only woman in that group.
   And that unique vantage point gave her movies a different perspective
   and feel from her male peers like Jean-Luc Godard and Francois
   Truffaut. This new perspective and the aforementioned quote are at the
   centre of ‘the female gaze’ and what it means. To put it simply, the
   female gaze is a term referring to the perspective of women in the
   creation of art, as well as the representation of women in them. The
   latter point encompasses the portrayal of women having agency. So, all
   genders can tap into the female gaze. The term was coined as an
   extension and response to feminist film theorist Laura Mulvey’s idea of
   ‘the male gaze’. Taking Hitchcock’s Rear Window (1954) as an example,
   she talks about how women are treated as objects of pleasure. Their
   purpose is solely to be looked at; without being able to look back. The
   theme of voyeurism plays a key role in the film, after all. Before we
   delve into examples of the female gaze in art, we should first
   understand the importance of the artist’s role in whatever they create.
   Agnes Varda at the helm

   Perspective is everything in any work of art. Something life-changing
   can come out as hollow and off-putting if a different person expresses
   it. When analysing an artwork, the artist’s life story, headspace at
   the time of its creation, and intentions are usually brought up to help
   dissect it. It is very understandable, isn’t it? Frida Kahlo’s The Two
   Fridas springs to mind in this regard. Elements of Frida’s life, like
   her dual Mexican-European heritage and her separation from her husband
   Diego Rivera, all coalesce and manifest themselves into the very
   painting. Kahlo’s paintings often depict her own body and experiences,
   including her physical pain and emotional turmoil. Through her art, she
   asserts her own agency and control over her image, challenging the
   traditional male gaze. There are also many novels, from Daphne Du
   Maurier’s Rebecca to Gillian Flynn’s Gone Girl, that tap into this
   female gaze.
   Frida Kahlo’s most famous work alludes to several things about her
   life: Marriage, culture, and loss.

   And speaking of novels, there is the authorial intent fallacy which
   states that the creator’s intent is irrelevant in understanding their
   creation. This seems to contradict the female gaze by separating the
   text from its author. But it is important to note that it is a type of
   literary criticism that validates the audience’s interpretations rather
   than shunning the artist. Besides, the female gaze doesn’t just apply
   to the artist or the characters in their works. It could also refer to
   us, the audience. The same story viewed through a woman’s lens can
   reveal different unintended interpretations. And this leads to the
   importance of women in art. Whenever someone tells me that the gender
   of an artist doesn't matter and that a great artwork is a great artwork
   regardless of whether the creator was a man or a woman, I get extremely
   irritated. Whilst it is true that the artist’s gender alone doesn’t
   make their creation great, these views miss the point of celebrating
   women. If a singular demographic dominates the whole landscape, their
   perspectives become monotonous and fresh takes on the art form and on
   various other things get stifled. Even gender-neutral subjects like
   love and loss can be put under a different spotlight, and they will
   glow differently. Women can also shed light on completely unique ideas
   from their vantage points. Chantal Akerman’s Jeanne Dielman (1975) is a
   shining example.

   This Belgian arthouse film recently gained popularity for topping the
   BFI’s Sight and Sound Top 250 films of all-time list, pushing a lot of
   people to watch this relatively unknown film. Little did they know that
   it would be a film about a single housewife doing chores. While it
   slowly spirals out into something different, it is just a woman doing
   chores for the most part. But it highlighted something that I never
   bothered to think about. It deftly portrayed the boring Sisyphean
   nature of a housewife’s life, forced to conform to notions of a
   patriarchal society. Never in a million years could I, or any other
   man, have told this story because these are situations only a woman can
   experience. Hence, it is imperative that we encourage not only women
   but people from diverse backgrounds to tell their stories and offer
   unique insights.

   One of the best examples in music, I’d say, is the indie pop icon
   Bjork. She is probably the best example of an artist leveraging her
   culture and life to enhance her art. Her eclectic music and eccentric
   persona are unapologetically and authentically her. The female gaze (I
   suppose ‘voice’ is more fitting) is prevalent in her works, especially
   in her two best albums that are filled with glacial synths and warm
   strings, Homogenic (1997) and Vespertine (2001). Both of these records
   are a celebration of romance and sexuality with a distinctly feminine
   edge, especially Vespertine, with the whole album revolving around
   these topics. Homogenic’s sound was inspired by her native country,
   Iceland, with the album sounding like rough volcanoes and the soft moss
   growing on them. A man, or even any other person, could never have made
   these. It would just feel different and wrong. The mere existence of
   records like these is proof that we need more women in various art
   forms.
   Homogenic (Left) and Vespertine (Right): Two brilliant art-pop albums

   Discourse about the female gaze spiked in interest with the release of
   the absolutely phenomenal Portrait of a Lady on Fire by Celine Sciamma
   in 2019. This film is a manifesto about the female gaze, in Sciamma’s
   own words, and is literally and figuratively about gazes, glances, and
   stares. It tells the story of Marianne, a painter commissioned to draw
   a wedding portrait of Heloise, a well-to-do upper-class woman who is
   reluctant to marry. Refusing to pose for the portrait, Marianne is
   forced to memorise her face by accompanying her on daily walks, and
   then a passionate romance between them ensues. The film, staying true
   to its setting, is filled with gorgeous painting-like imagery and deals
   with themes like the relationship between the artist and the muse, the
   nature of woman’s art and the marginalisation of their art. Many
   consider it to be a flipping of the tale of Orpheus and Eurydice. In
   Greek myth, Orpheus descends into the underworld to bring back his
   lover, Eurydice. The Gods would let him do so, but on one condition:
   Eurydice would follow Orpheus on their way back on the condition that
   Orpheus should not look back to see if she would still be there. Of
   course, just before they reach the surface, he gets tempted and looks
   back, sending her to the depths of Hades.
   Press enter or click to view image in full size
   “I saw her…. She didn’t see me”

   In the film, Marianne and Heloise read this story and debate why
   Orpheus looked back. Invoking this myth was a masterstroke by Sciamma
   as she notes that ‘a male gaze can kill you’, literally in this case.
   She flips this tale and tells it from the perspective of Eurydice,
   Heloise in this film’s case, as she asks that what if Eurydice was the
   one who asked Orpheus to look back? Heloise is the one who offers a
   differing perspective in their discussion. When Marianne points out her
   mannerisms after spending time painting her, she reverses the scenario
   and points out Marianne’s nervous mannerisms when she paints. She
   points out that although she is the muse, she also stares back at the
   painter. Much like how Eurydice also gazes at Orpheus when he looks
   back; it is an equal relationship. The distinction between the artist
   and their subject, the observer and the observed, gets blurred.

   One can’t talk about the female gaze without talking about Cleo From 5
   To 7 (1962), directed by none other than Agnes Varda. As you might
   expect at this point, this film revolves around gazes and is thus, an
   essential one to discuss. The titular character, Cleo, will get the
   results of a medical test in two hours that’ll confirm if she has
   cancer or not. And in her anxiety of waiting, the film discusses themes
   of existentialism from a feminine viewpoint. Viewpoints play a big role
   in the film, as Cleo often resorts to mirrors for solace. She finds
   courage and comfort in her beauty and reassures herself in front of
   mirrors. Through them, she sees how others perceive her. About halfway
   through the film, a song that she sings sparks an emotional reaction in
   her. She realises she is trying to be a different person for the
   gratification of others and not who she wants to be. She goes out and
   sees a mirror with Mandarin(?) text on it that obscures her reflection.
   She says, “I can’t read my own fear”, and moves on. In a way, her own
   reflection becomes a foreign language to her, beginning to break the
   confinement of society’s perception of her. Then we see her through the
   reflection of a cracked mirror. She begins to rediscover herself, and
   from then on, she looks through the mirrors, i.e. right through how
   others perceive her. The last mirror we see is that of a small handheld
   one shattering on the ground. Her transformation from an object to a
   woman is now complete, and the results of her medical test do not seem
   to matter anymore.
   Press enter or click to view image in full size
   Cleo Through The Looking Glass

   The 18th-century period pieces and the 1960s artsy French films might
   not be the best to start with if you’re hearing these for the first
   time. So I recommend to you, in my opinion, the greatest piece of media
   released in the past 20 years, Fleabag. A razor-sharp, pitch-black
   comedy, this show challenges the notion of mainstream feminism through
   its complex and flawed protagonist, Fleabag, played by the show’s
   creator, Phoebe Waller-Bridge. This staunchly feminist yet iconoclastic
   series takes shots at mainstream feminism in the very first episode.
   Fleabag and her character arc are not supposed to be your usual
   feminist allegories. She’s not there to teach us a lesson; she just is.
   In her debaucherous journey, she consistently breaks the fourth wall
   and talks to us, as friends as she calls us. She heightens this whole
   concept by literally gazing into you, making you an active participant
   in the process. We are her friends, as she tells her therapist, which
   is a bit sad considering she can’t listen to us. Her penchant for
   breaking the fourth wall gets turned on its head brilliantly in the
   second season and especially in its finale. I shall not spoil these,
   for I want you to watch this show as soon as possible.

   I’d like to conclude this piece by talking about a speech delivered by
   David Foster Wallace called This Is Water. The legendary writer talks
   about the difficulty of empathy and how it is monumentally difficult to
   put yourself in someone else’s shoes in times of duress. We being the
   fish that go our whole lives without realising that it is water we’re
   swimming in. He urges us at the end of his speech to remind ourselves
   that “This is water, this is water”. Similarly, it is easy for us to
   enjoy art with themes and characters that we are most familiar with. It
   is up to us to push ourselves out of our comfort zones and experience
   the stories told by people completely different from us. At the end of
   the day, that’s what art is: A multi-faceted mirror that is held
   against us, by us; and we get to see the fragmented psyches of
   different aspects of humanity. This is art’s greatest essence, and this
   is why women in art matter.
   Feminism
   Art
   Film
   Women

   --

   --
   (BUTTON)

   3
   (BUTTON)
   The Festember Blog
   The Festember Blog

Published in The Festember Blog

   491 followers
   ·Last published Feb 14, 2024

   The official creative outlet of Festember, the inter college cultural,
   literary and arts extravaganza of NIT, Trichy. Subscribe to look at the
   world through a unique looking glass, with our thought-provoking and
   fun reads.
   Raamanujan
   Raamanujan

Written by Raamanujan

   158 followers
   ·24 following

   I have buried myself under a hundred layers of irony

Responses (3)

   (BUTTON) See all responses

   Help

   Status

   About

   Careers

   Press

   Blog

   Privacy

   Rules

   Terms

   Text to speech
