   #Matriarch - RSS

   top of page

     * Home
     * About Us
       (BUTTON)
          + Our Team
          + Our Founder
     * What We Do
       (BUTTON)
          + Schools
     * Book us
     * Coaching
     * Events
     * Blog
       (BUTTON)
          + Lifestyle & Culture
          + Relationships & Sex
          + Opinion
          + Mental Health
     * Content
       (BUTTON)
          + Podcast
          + Resources
          + Socials
     *

   Use tab to navigate through the menu items.

If Looks Could Kill …The Art of the Female Gaze by Agnes Fanning

     * Writer: Agnes Fanning
       Agnes Fanning
     * Oct 26, 2020
     * 7 min read

   (BUTTON)

   Updated: Jan 8, 2021

“Would that be dangerous, to not look while being looked at?”

― Helen Oyeyemi, The Icarus Girl

   According to Greek mythology, those who gazed into Medusa’s eyes would
   turn to stone. But what changes if, instead, we say that Medusa
   possessed the ability to turn anyone she gazed at to stone? The
   question lies in establishing the difference between what it means to
   see and what it means to look. ‘To see’ can be defined as noticing or
   becoming aware or someone or something, whereas ‘to look’ is to direct
   your gaze in a specified direction. Looking is an active movement that
   requires intent, as opposed to the passive process of seeing.

   This distinction is important because it allows us to reframe the space
   that Medusa occupies in classical mythology. The story goes that, after
   being raped by Poseidon, the beautiful Medusa is the one that receives
   the punishment; Athena turns her into a monstrous Gorgon, with snakes
   for hair and a deadly gaze. She is feared and seen as a hideous threat.
   However, if you have to gaze into her eyes – in other words, make eye
   contact with her – to be petrified, you don’t turn to stone because you
   see or looked at her, you turn to stone because she looked at you. In a
   world were women are judged by their appearance, routinely acknowledged
   as objects to be seen and bodies to be looked at, Medusa’s fatal gaze
   can be redefined as an act of defiance rather than one of defence. All
   the men that come before Perseus, the ‘hero’ who beheads her, don’t die
   because her appearance is so horrific to lay eyes on, rather Medusa
   kills them because she reverses the action of the male gaze,
   confronting it with the female gaze. To quote the feminist French
   director and artist Agnès Varda:‘The first feminist gesture is to say:
   “OK, they’re looking at me. But I’m looking at them.” The act of
   deciding to look, of deciding that the world is not defined by how
   people see me, but how I see them.’

   An interesting inversion of the myth of Medusa and Perseus is the Old
   Testament story of Judith and Holofernes. The same action takes place,
   but in the latter, it is the female who beheads the male. The
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)

   Bible tells the story of Judith, described as a beautiful widow, who
   seduces and subsequently slays Holofernes, a general sent to attack her
   home city. Throughout history, this story has been turned into art, and
   you only have to look at modern depictions to see how Judith has become
   the subject of male

   fantasies (see Franz Stuck’s Judith (1928)). To what extent can a woman
   be depicted as empowered by her sexuality if she is a product of the
   male gaze? Do we look at Gustav Klimt’s Judith I differently to Tina
   Blondell’s I’ll make you shorter by a head (Judith I)?

   (Left: Judith I (1901) - Gustav Klimt, Right: I’ll make you shorter by
   a head (Judith I) (1999) - Tina Blondell)

   Referring to her reworking of Klimt’s Judith, Blondell (born 1953) has
   said: ‘I believe that Klimt painted Judith the seductress. I wanted to
   paint Judith the executioner.’ Almost four hundred years earlier,
   Artemisia Gentileschi (1593-1656) was doing something similar. One of
   the few female artists from the seventeenth century that has received
   the recognition she deserves today, Artemisia also painted perhaps the
   most well-known depiction of Judith slaying Holofernes. She produced
   various different paintings inspired by the biblical story, another
   being Judith and her Maidservant, painted after a similar one by her
   father, also an artist. Although they portray the same moment of the
   story, the slight differences illustrate how depiction varies depending
   on whether the same subject is represented through the male or female
   gaze.
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)

   Left: Judith and her Maidservant (c.1613-14) - Artemisia Gentileschi,
   Right: Judith and her Maidservant with the Head of Holofernes (c.1608)
   - Orazio Gentileschi)

   Both paintings reproduce the same moment following the narrative’s main
   action; the women are checking to see if anyone has caught them. In her
   father’s more idealised style, Holofernes’ head is at the centre of the
   composition and Judith’s sword is hardly visible as she holds it by her
   side. By contrast, Artemisia’s painting places less emphasis on the
   grey and lifeless severed head. Instead, by painting Judith’s bold
   stance with the sword gripped over her shoulder, she becomes a
   self-assertive protagonist.

   The male gaze – defined as the perspective of a notionally typical
   heterosexual man considered as embodied in the audience or intended
   audience for films and other visual media, characterized by a tendency
   to objectify or sexualize women – overwhelmingly determines how women
   are portrayed and therefore seen. Like in the case of Artemisia, the
   worth of a woman is established in terms of men, and recently there has
   been a move away from solely seeing her art through the lens of her
   biography and through the men that featured as part of it.

Until recently, I felt like my body wasn’t mine

   If the worth of a woman is established in terms of men, it is also
   established in terms of how she is seen by men. This objectification
   and idealisation leads to girls growing up, seeking validation from the
   male gaze. Until recently, I felt like my body wasn’t mine, like it had
   been appropriated by society for the purpose of reflecting its
   normative standards. I wanted to be seen how society wanted to see me.
   It’s easy to feel as though the way I see myself is completely divorced
   from how I think people see me and it’s also easy to decide to change
   who you are to try and determine how people see you. An idea exists of
   wanting to be a certain way because it’s easier and less confusing.
   Consistency is palatable in a conformist society.

   However, it would be wrong to convey a simplified binary view of the
   world we live it. It isn’t reflective of society. Professor Kimberlé
   Crenshaw, a civil rights activist and legal scholar, coined the term
   ‘intersectionality’ in an academic paper written in 1989
   (“Demarginalizing the Intersection of Race and Sex.”). The term
   acknowledges that discrimination relating to gender equality varies
   depending on other aspects of a woman’s identity: age, race, ethnicity,
   class, religion. Crenshaw argued that traditional feminism excluded
   black women due to their unique experience in facing overlapping
   discrimination.
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)

   A contemporary American artist who examines the intersectionality of
   race, gender, and sexuality is Tschabalala Self (born 1990). Her aim is
   to provide an explanation of the voyeuristic tendencies towards the
   gendered and racialized body.

   (Left: Out of Body (2020) - Tschabalala Self, Right: Carma (2016) -
   Tschabalala Self)

   In her art, Self exaggerates the physical characteristics of the black
   female body to draw attention to the way the black female form is seen.
   She states that the figures in her work ‘are fully aware of their
   conspicuousness and are unmoved by the viewer. Their role is not to
   show, explain, or perform but rather “to be.” In being, their presence
   is acknowledged and their significance felt.’ The gaze of the figure in
   Carma directly confronts the viewer, forcing us to consider how our own
   conscious or unconscious biases affect the way we look at her. The
   viewer is made complicit in the act of looking from the perspective of
   the voyeur and challenged by the figure:

if she is going to be looked at, it’ll be on her terms.

   It’s interesting to consider that art extends itself to any form of
   representation; how we see women in art is how we see women presented
   in the media, for example. In the same way, humans exhibit themselves
   like we exhibit art – the images we post are there to be looked at. In
   these spaces, women are still seen as objects of desire and in art
   history this is exemplified by the tradition of the female nude,
   whereby the female naked body was presented as an object to satisfy a
   man’s gaze. Increasingly, this has been called into question, and one
   woman that reverses the gendered portrayals of the nude is the Welsh
   artist Sylvia Sleigh (1916-2010).
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)

   (Left: Le Concert Champêtre (c.1509) - Titian, Right: Concert Champêtre
   (1976) - Sylvia Sleigh)

   Her work subverts this form of painting by depicting nude men in poses
   that were historically ascribed to women, subjecting nude men to the
   male gaze. She also equalizes the roles of men and women. For example,
   in the painting above she repaints Titian’s work, portraying all the
   figures as nudes, rather than just the women. Sleigh has affirmed that
   ‘I feel that my paintings stress the equality of men and women (women
   and men). To me, women were often portrayed as sex objects in
   humiliating poses. I wanted to give my perspective.’

   Challenging the way women are seen in art, and by extension society,
   makes us challenge the way we see women/ourselves. I’m 22 now and I can
   feel myself becoming self-aware, regarding how I perceive my identity,
   and critical of the structures that influence the way I am seen. A big
   part of this is acknowledging that my own experience of the male gaze
   and finding my female gaze has been made significantly easier by being
   white and cisgender. The female gaze confronts norms imposed by
   hegemonic masculinity (a practice that legitimizes men's dominant
   position in society), but this is not to say that women are the only
   ones affected by it. Views on gender held by society can be as damaging
   to men as they are to women, and even then, gender should not be
   confined to simply refer to male and female.

   In art, as in reality, the female gaze holds immense power, and after
   being obscured by misogyny,

‘you only have to look at the Medusa straight on to see her. And she's not
deadly. She's beautiful and she's laughing.’ (Hélène Cixous, ‘The Laugh of
the Medusa’).

   ree
   (BUTTON)

Agnes Fanning

I really wish I'd spent more time talking to Aggie at school. Talking to her
now, there are so many similarities in our thoughts and beliefs and I'm so
glad of the friendship that's flourished since then.

I think this piece speaks so well for Aggie's intellect as well as her craft
at writing. This piece fits in so beautifully with Matriarch and everything
we have going on and I feel so honoured to have platformed it so thank you,
Aggie.

Aggie is studying Languages at the University of Oxford.

     * Community
     * Opinion
     * Relationships & Sex

   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)



Get involved in Matriarch

because the best lessons are shared.

   write for us
   (BUTTON) book a discovery call

Company

ABOUT US

WORK WITH US

Community

BLOG

EVENTS

WHAT WE OFFER

VACANCIES

CONTACT

FAQs

THE MATRIARCH METHOD

RESOURCES

PODCAST

   Privacy

   Terms

   © Matriarch 2025
     * Instagram
     * LinkedIn
     * TikTok

   bottom of page
