   Table of Contents, Body Language Dimensions Resources Page
   Previous Section, Body Language Dimensions Next Section, Body Language
   Dimensions

Westside Toastmasters is located in West Los Angeles and Santa Monica,
California

Chapter 8

THE EYES HAVE IT

   Much of our face-to-face time with people is spent looking at their
   faces. The signals they send out with their eyes play a vital part in
   revealing their thoughts and attitudes. In fact, of all our body
   language signals, the eyes reveal our thoughts and emotions most
   accurately. They're placed in the strongest focal position on the body,
   and because the pupils respond unconsciously to stimuli they can't be
   artificially manipulated or controlled.

   Your eyes are the gateway to the soul and reflect what's going on
   inside of you. They're also the means of seeing what's going on inside
   of someone else. When people meet for the first time they make a series
   of quick judgements about each other, based largely on what they see.

   Communication through our eyes is most assuredly a two-way street in
   our complex society, we are interdependent on one another. Eye contact
   helps regulate conversation. Some people instinctively know how to use
   their eyes to their own advantage, to garner sympathy, convey sexual
   interest, or to deliver the message, 'Stay away!' With practice, your
   eyes can speak the messages you dare not say aloud. We look at the role
   that eyes play in communicating your feelings and intentions. Over the
   course of your life you discover how to use your eyes to command
   attention, display interest, show disapproval, create intimate
   feelings, and demonstrate dominance. Here, we will examine how to read
   the eye signals that others give you.
   George Bush, Binoculars With Caps On
   X-ray vision can come in handy

The Power Of Holding A Gaze

   Establishing and maintaining eye contact comfortably with another
   person can be the basis for successful communication, giving you and
   the person you're communicating with a feeling of wellbeing and trust.
   Sometimes, eye contact can be uncomfortable though, such as when the
   other person seems dishonest, untrustworthy, or angry. Whether the
   interaction is comfortable or not has to do, in part, with the way that
   a person looks, or doesn't look, at you. The intensity and length of
   time she holds your eye influences the meaning of the gaze. The
   following sections explain the different attitudes that a held gaze can
   mean.

   When a person holds your gaze he or she is telling you one of two
   things: They find you attractive or interesting, or they may be feeling
   some anger or hostility towards you for whatever reason and are
   offering you a non-verbal challenge. How do you tell the difference?
   Look at their pupils: In the first case, the pupils should be dilated;
   in the second, the pupils are constricted.

Adjusting Pupil Width

   Confucius said, 'Look into a person's pupils. He cannot hide himself.'
   In given light conditions, your pupils will dilate or contract as your
   attitude and mood change from positive to negative and vice versa. When
   someone becomes excited, their pupils can dilate to up to four times
   their original size. Conversely, an angry, negative mood causes the
   pupils to contract to 'beady eyes' or 'snake eyes'. Lighter eyes can
   look more attractive because it's easier to see the dilation taking
   place.
   Beady Eyes
   'Beady' eyes

Studying Pupils

   University of Chicago biopsychologist Eckhard Hess developed
   pupillometrics to assess the size of the eye's pupil as a means of
   gauging emotion or interest. Hess discovered that the pupil enlarges
   when someone looks at something that stimulates him or her. When
   someone looks at uninteresting or personally unpleasant things, perhaps
   war scenes as an example, the pupils contract. In one of Hess's studies
   heterosexual men were shown retouched photographs of women. In half the
   photographs the women's pupils were made to look larger, in the other
   half the pupils were made to look smaller. With few exceptions, the men
   perceived the women with the larger pupils as being more attractive and
   friendlier than the same women whose pupils appeared smaller. When
   asked why they found one set of women more attractive than the other
   the men were unable to give an answer. None of the men remarked on the
   difference in the size of the pupils.

   Retouching photographs of male and female models for print
   advertisements is common practice. The pupils are enlarged to make the
   models more attractive and alluring. Sales of manufactured goods
   measurably increase where close ups of the face are used to promote
   merchandise, especially in the worlds of fashion, cosmetics, and hair
   products.

   Interestingly, Hess also found that increases in pupil size are
   positively correlated with problem solving mental activity, dilating to
   maximum size when a person has arrived at a problem solution.
   Woman's Eyes Contracted and Dilated Pupils
   Which picture do you find more attractive?

   The eyes are a key signal in courtship and the purpose of eye make-up
   is to emphasize eye display. If a woman is attracted to a man her
   pupils will automaically dilate and he is likely to correctly decode
   this signal subconsciously without knowing it. This is why romantic
   encounters are most successful in dimly lit places because everyone's
   pupils dilate and create the impression that couples are interested in
   each other.

   When lovers gaze deep into each other's eyes, they are unknowingly
   looking for pupil-dilation signals and each becomes excited by the
   dilation of the other's pupils. Research has shown that when
   pornographic films are shown to men their pupils can dilate to almost
   three times their size. Research shows that most women's eyes dilate to
   their extreme when looking at images of other mothers and children. The
   next time you get a chance, observe a mother watching her newborn
   child. Young babies and children have larger pupils than adults, and
   babies' pupils constantly dilate when adults are present in an attempt
   to look as appealing as possible and therefore receive constant
   attention. This is why the bestselling children's toys almost always
   have oversized pupils.

   Research also shows that pupil dilation has a reciprocal effect on the
   person who sees the dilated pupils. Men looking at pictures of women
   with dilated pupils showed greater pupil dilation than when they looked
   at pictures of women with constricted pupils.

Take the Pupil Test

   The ability to decode pupil dilation is hardwired into the brain and
   happens completely automatically. To test this, cover illustration B
   with your hand and ask someone to stare at the 'pupils' in illustration
   A. Then switch them to staring at illustration B and you'll see how
   their pupils dilate to match the illustration, because their brain
   thinks it's looking at eyes that find it attractive. Women's pupils
   dilate faster than men's to create rapport with what their brain sees
   as another person's eyes.
   Eye Pupils Contracted [filler20.jpg] Eye Pupils Dilated
   Pupils contracted and pupils dilated

   Hess conducted a pupil response experiment by showing five pictures to
   respondents: a naked male, a naked female, a baby, a mother and baby,
   and a landscape. Predictably, men's pupils dilated most at the naked
   female, gay men dilated most at the naked male but women's pupils
   dilated most at the picture of the mother and baby with the naked male
   picture coming in second.

   Tests conducted with expert card players show that fewer games were won
   by the experts when their opponents wore dark glasses. If an opponent
   was dealt four aces in a game of poker for example, his rapid pupil
   dilation could be unconsciously detected by the expert, who would
   'sense' he should not bet on the next hand. Dark glasses worn by the
   opponents eliminated pupil signals and, as a result, the experts won
   fewer hands than usual. These card playing dynamics can be readily
   observed on video channels showing Texas Hold'em poker tournaments
   where a number of players will wear darker glasses and / or baseball
   caps to help mask signals generated by the eyes.

   The ancient Chinese gem traders were expert in watching their buyers'
   eyes when negotiating prices. If the pupils dilated, the trader knew
   she was offering too good a deal and had to negotiate harder.
   Courtesans and prostitutes were known to make themselves appear more
   enticing and desirable by putting drops of belladonna in their eyes to
   dilate their pupils.
   David Bowie's Eyes
   David Bowie had different-colored eyes (called Heterochromia), one blue
   and one hazel and permanently dilated. This was the result of a fight
   over a girlfriend at the age of 12.

   An old cliche says, 'Look a person in the eye when you talk to them'
   when you are communicating or negotiating, but it's better to practice
   'looking them in the pupil' as the pupils will tell you their real
   feelings.

Women Bear The Advantage

   Some tests were conducted by Dr Simon Baron-Cohen at Cambridge
   University where subjects were shown photographs in which only a narrow
   strip of the face across both eyes was visible. The subjects were asked
   to choose between mental states expressed in the photographs such as
   'friendly', 'relaxed', 'hostile' and 'worried' and attitudes such as
   'desire for you' and 'desire for someone else'.

   Statistically, pure guess work would result in half the answers being
   correct but men's average score was 19 out of 25 while women scored 22
   out of 25. This test shows that both sexes have a greater ability to
   decode eye signals than body signals and that women are better at it
   than men. Scientists don't yet know how this eye information is sent or
   decoded, they simply know that we can do it. Autistic people - who are
   nearly all males - scored the lowest. Autistic brains lack the ability
   to read people's body language and this is one reason why autistic
   people have difficulty in forming social relationships, even though
   many have very high IQs.

We Could See The Whites Of Their Eyes

   Humans are the only primates that have whites of the eye, known as the
   sclera - apes' eyes are completely dark. The white of the eye evolved
   as a communication aid to allow humans to see where other people were
   looking, because direction is linked to emotional states. Women's
   brains have more hardwiring than men's to read emotions, and one
   consequence of this is that women have more white of the eye than men.
   Apes lack eye-whites, which means that their prey don't know where the
   ape is looking or whether they have been spotted, giving the ape a
   greater chance of hunting success.

The Eyebrow Lift

   This gesture is a long-distance 'hello' greeting signal which has been
   used everywhere since ancient times. The eyebrow lift is universal and
   is also used by monkeys and apes as a social greeting signal,
   confirming that it's an inborn gesture. The eyebrows rise for the
   briefest of moments and then drop again and its purpose is to draw
   attention to the face so that clear signals can be exchanged. The only
   culture that doesn't use it is the Japanese, where it's considered
   improper or impolite and has definite sexual connotations.
   Eyebrow Lift
   The eyebrow lift

   This is an unconscious signal that acknowledges the other person's
   presence and is probably linked to the fear reaction of being
   surprised, or saying, 'I'm surprised and afraid of you', which
   translates to 'I acknowledge you and am not threatening'. We don't
   Eyebrow Flash strangers we pass in the street or people we don't like,
   and people who don't give the Eyebrow Flash on initial greeting are
   perceived as potentially aggressive. Try this simple test and you'll
   discover first hand the power of the Eyebrow Flash - sit in the lobby
   of a hotel and Eyebrow Flash everyone who goes past. You'll see that
   not only do others return the Flash and smile, many will come over and
   begin to talk to you. The golden rule is always Eyebrow Flash people
   you like or those who you want to like you.

Eye Widening

   Lowering the eyebrows is how humans show dominance or aggression
   towards others, whereas raising the eyebrows shows submission.
   Researchers Keating & Keating found that several species of apes and
   monkeys use exactly the same gestures for the same purpose. They also
   found that people who intentionally raise their eyebrows are perceived
   as submissive by both humans and apes, and that those who lower them
   are perceived as aggressive.

   Women can widen their eyes by raising their eyebrows and eyelids to
   create the 'baby face' appearance of a small infant. This has a
   powerful effect on men by releasing hormones into the brain, which
   stimulate the desire to protect and defend females. Women pluck and
   redraw their eyebrows higher up the forehead to appear more submissive
   because, on a subconscious level at least, they know it appeals to men.
   If men trim their eyebrows they do it from the top of the eyebrow down
   to make their eyes appear narrower and more authoritative.
   Marilyn Monroe [filler20.jpg] James Cagney [filler20.jpg] John F
   Kennedy
   High-placed eyebrows gave Marilyn Monroe a submissive appearance while
   low-set eyebrows gave James Cagney his aggressive look and John F
   Kennedy's turned-in eyebrows made him appear both authoritative and
   concerned

   John F Kennedy had what are known as 'medially down-turned' eyebrows,
   which gave his face a permanently concerned look that appealed to
   voters. If he'd had big bushy eyebrows like actor James Cagney's he
   would have had a less powerful impact on the electorate.

  The 'Looking Up' Cluster

   Young Princess Diana
   Princess Diana at the age of eight - like most young girls, she
   silently understood the impact of putting the head down and looking up

   Lowering the head and looking up is another submissive gesture that
   appeals to men because it makes the eyes appear larger and makes a
   woman appear more childlike. This is because children are so much
   smaller than adults and spend their looking time gazing up and this
   creates a parenting reaction in both men and women.

   Princess Diana
   Princess Diana used the 'Looking Up' cluster to evoke world empathy
   during her marital problems

   Princess Diana made an art form out of keeping her chin down while
   looking up and exposing her vulnerable neck. This child like gesture
   cluster triggered maternal and paternal reactions towards her in
   millions of people, especially when she seemed to be under attack by
   the British Royal Family. People who use these submissive clusters
   usually don't practice them consciously but know that when they use
   them, they get a result

  How To Light The Fire In Men

   Sexy Marilyn Monroe
   Marilyn Monroe was a master using pre-orgasmic expressions and body
   language, understanding at least subconsciously how to access men's
   emotional core

   Lowering the eyelids while simultaneously raising the eyebrows, looking
   up and slightly parting the lips is a cluster that has been used by
   women for centuries to show sexual submissiveness. This is one of the
   historic trademarks of the sex sirens in cinema such as Marilyn Monroe,
   Mae West, or Elizabeth Taylor.

   Not only does this gesture maximize the distance between the eyelid and
   eyebrows, it also gives the person a mysterious, secretive look and new
   research shows that this is the expression many women have on their
   faces immediately before having an orgasm.

  Gaze Behavior - Where Do You Look?

   It is only when you see 'eye to eye' with another person that a real
   basis for communication can be established. While some people can make
   us feel comfortable when they talk with us, others make us feel ill at
   ease and some seem untrustworthy. Initially, this has to do with the
   length of time that they look at us or with how long they hold our gaze
   as they speak.

   Michael Argyle, a pioneer of social psychology and nonverbal
   communication skills in Britain, found that when Westerners and
   Europeans talk, their average gaze time is around 60%, consisting of
   40% gaze time when talking, 75% when listening and 30% mutual gazing.
   He recorded the average gaze length to be 3 seconds and the length of a
   mutual gaze was 1.5 seconds. The amount of eye contact in a typical
   conversation ranges from 25% to 100%, depending on who's talking and
   what culture they're from. When we talk we maintain 40 to 60% eye
   contact with an average of 80% eye contact when listening. The notable
   exception to this rule is Japan and some Asian and South American
   cultures, where extended eye contact is seen as aggressive or
   disrespectful. The Japanese tend to look away or at your throat, which
   can be disconcerting for culturally inexperienced Westerners and
   Europeans.

   Argyle found that when person A likes person B, he will look at him a
   lot. This causes B to think that A likes him, so B will like A in
   return. In other words, in most cultures, to build a good rapport with
   another person, your gaze should meet theirs about 60% to 70% of the
   time. This will also cause them to begin to like you. It is not
   surprising, therefore, that the nervous, timid person who meets our
   gaze less than one-third of the time is rarely trusted. This is also
   why, in negotiations, dark tinted glasses should be avoided as they
   make others feel you are either staring at them or trying to avoid
   them.

   As with most body language and gestures, the length of time that one
   person gazes at another can be culturally determined. Always be sure to
   consider cultural circumstances before jumping to conclusions. The
   safest rule when travelling to places such as Japan is to mirror the
   gaze time of your hosts.

   When two people meet and make eye contact for the first time, it's
   usually the person who is subordinate who looks away first. This means
   that not looking away becomes a subtle way to deliver a challenge or
   show disagreement when someone gives their opinion or point of view.
   Where the status of the other person is higher, however, for example,
   the person is your boss, you can send a clear message of disagreement
   by holding his gaze for only several seconds longer than would be
   usually acceptable. But it's not a good idea to do this regularly with
   your boss if you want to keep your job.

  Maintaining Contact In Awkward Circumstances

   Social researchers sent a group of people to a nudist colony and took a
   video of where they were looking when they were introduced to new
   people. All the non-nudist men reported that they had trouble resisting
   the urge to look down and the video replay showed how obvious it was
   when they did look down. The women said they did not experience these
   problems and rarely was a woman filmed intentionally gazing towards the
   pelvic area. This is because men are equipped with a form of tunnel
   vision that makes them far better than women at seeing directly in
   front of them and over long distances for spotting targets. Most men's
   close range and peripheral vision is far poorer than women's, however,
   which is why men have difficulty seeing things in refrigerators,
   cupboards and drawers. Women's peripheral vision extends to at least 45
   degrees to each side, above and below, which means she can appear to be
   looking at someone's face while, at the same time, she is checking out
   their other personal assets.

   US Olympic Rowing Team
   Women's wider peripheral vision lets them appear to be looking in one
   direction when they are, in fact, looking in another.

  How to Lock In Men's Attention

   When a woman wants to get a man's attention across a room she will meet
   his gaze, hold it for two to three seconds, then look away and down.
   This gaze is long enough for her to send him a message of interest and
   potential submission. An experiment by Monika Moore PhD, of Websters
   University, showed that most men are not hardwired to read a woman's
   first gaze signal so she usually needs to repeat it three times before
   the average man picks up on it, four times for really slow men and five
   or more times for the especially thick. When she finally gets his
   attention she will often use a small version of the Eyebrow Flash that
   is a small, subtle eye-widening gesture that tells him the signal was
   intended for him.

   Sometimes a simple face-to-face verbal approach of 'Hey, I like you!'
   is more effective on men who are slow on the uptake.

  Deceit Not So Difficult

   Many people associate lying with looking away. In a series of
   experiments participants were told to tell a series of lies to others
   in interview videos. Viewers of the videos were asked to judge who was
   lying and who was not. What was discovered was contrary to a popular
   belief about liars. Approximately 30% of the liars constantly looked
   away when they lied and the viewers spotted these lies around 80% of
   the time, with women having a better catch rate than men. The other 70%
   of the liars maintained strong eye contact with their victim, assuming
   they were less likely to get caught if they did the opposite of what
   people expected. They were right. Lie-catching dropped to an average of
   25%, with men scoring a dismal 15% success and women 35%. Women's more
   intuitive brains were better than men's in detecting voice changes,
   pupil dilation and other cues that gave the liar away. This shows that
   gaze alone is not a reliable signal of lying and you need to observe
   other gestures as well.

   When a person's gaze meets yours for more than two-thirds of the time,
   it can mean one of two things: first, he finds you interesting or
   appealing, in which case he'll also have dilated pupils; or second,
   he's hostile towards you and could be issuing a challenge, in which
   case the pupils will be constricted. As mentioned, women are good at
   deciphering pupil signals and can differentiate interest from
   aggression, but men are significantly worse at doing it. This is why
   the average man can't tell if a woman is about to give him a kiss or a
   slap in the face.

  Limiting Verbal Or Physical Aggression

   Most primates avert their gaze to show submission. If an ape is going
   to display aggression or is likely to attack, it will lock eyes onto
   its victim. To avoid being attacked, the victim win look away and try
   to make itself appear smaller. Scientific evidence shows that
   submission behavior appears to be hardwired into primate brains for
   survival reasons. Under attack, we make ourselves appear smaller by
   hunching our shoulders, pulling our arms in close to the body, pressing
   our knees together and locking our ankles under a chair, dropping our
   chin to the chest to protect the throat and averting our gaze by
   looking away. These gestures activate an 'off switch' in the brain of
   the aggressor and the attack can be avoided.

   This is an ideal position to take if you are being reprimanded by a
   superior when you actually deserve the reprimand, but it would be
   detrimental against a random street attack. From a person who is
   walking past a group of possible assailants in the street it would
   signal fear and this can contribute to inciting an attack. If you walk
   upright with larger movements, swinging your arms and legs and having
   your front open, you will project that you could defend yourself if
   necessary and so are less likely to be attacked.

  The Sideways Glance

   The Sideways Glance is used to communicate interest, uncertainty or
   hostility. When it is combined with slightly raised eyebrows or a
   smile, it communicates interest and is frequently used as a courtship
   signal, mostly by women. If it is clustered with down-turned eyebrows,
   furrowed brow or the corners of the mouth down-turned, it signals a
   suspicious, hostile or critical attitude.

  Extended Blinking

   A normal, relaxed blinking rate is six to eight blinks per minute and
   the eyes are closed for only about one tenth of a second. People under
   pressure, as when they are lying, will usually elevate their rate of
   eye blinking substantially.

   Extended blinking is an unconscious attempt by the person's brain to
   block you from their sight because they've become bored or
   disinterested or feel they are of a higher caliber than those around
   them. It's as if their brain can no longer tolerate dealing with you so
   their eyes shut for two to three seconds or longer to wipe you from
   sight and remain closed as the person momentarily removes you from his
   mind.

   Shutting You Out
   Shutting you out

   Those believing they are a cut above you in social or economic class
   may tilt their head back, 'looking down one's nose' as it is known.
   People feeling that their essential importance is not being recognized
   will also display this gesture. This is primarly a Western cultural
   gesture, more frequently found in those defining themselves in the
   upper social class.

  Darting Eyes

   When the eyes dart from side to side it can look as if the person is
   checking out the activity in the room but the reality is that the brain
   is searching for escape routes (just as happens in monkeys and apes),
   revealing a person's insecurity about what is happening.

   When you are with a particularly boring individual, your natural urge
   is to look away for escape routes. But because most of us are aware
   that looking away shows a lack of interest in the other person and
   signals our desire to escape, we look more at the boring individual and
   use a Tight-Lipped Smile to feign interest. This behavior parallels
   what liars are doing when they increase their eye contact to appear
   convincing.

  The Geography of the Face

   The geographical area of a person's face and body that you gaze upon
   can also dramatically affect the outcome of a face-to-face encounter.

   When you've finished reading this next section, try out the techniques
   discussed - without warning anyone - and you'll experience the powerful
   effect these skills can have. It takes about a week of practice for
   these eye techniques to become a normal part of your communication
   skills.

   There are three basic types of gazing: Social Gazing, Intimate Gazing
   and Power Gazing.

    1. The Social Gaze

   Experiments into gazing reveal that during social encounters the
   gazer's eyes look in a triangular area on the other person's face
   between the eyes and the mouth for about 90% of the gaze time.

   This is the area of the face we look at in a non-threatening
   environment. The other person will perceive you as non-aggressive.

   Social Gaze Area
   The Social Gazing area

    2. The Intimate Gaze

   When people approach each other from a distance, they look quickly
   between the other person's face and lower body to first establish what
   the sex of the person is and then a second time to determine a level of
   interest in them. This gaze is across the eyes and below the chin to
   lower parts of the person's body. In close encounters, it's the
   triangular area between the eyes and the chest and for distant gazing
   it's from the eyes to the groin or below.

   Men and women use this gaze to show interest in each other and those
   who are interested will return the gaze. We usually give two quick
   glances and then look at their face and, despite most people's strong
   denials about it, hidden camera studies reveal that everyone does it,
   including nuns.

   Intimate Gaze Zone
   The Intimate Gaze zone

   As noted earlier, a woman's wider-ranging peripheral vision, however,
   allows her to check out a man's body from head to toe without getting
   caught. Male tunnel vision is why a man will move his gaze up and down
   a woman's body in a very obvious way. This is also the reason why men
   are constantly accused of checking out women's bodies visually at close
   range but women are rarely accused of the same, even though research
   shows that women do more of it than men. It's not that men gawk more
   than women - men's tunnel vision means they keep getting caught. ...
   And, like it or not, everyone steals a look at a woman's rear when she
   leaves a room, even if they don't like her front view.

   Women's Superior Peripheral Vision
   Women's wider peripheral vision means never getting caught; Men's
   Tunnel Vision means always getting caught

   Women Checking Out Man's Butt [filler20.jpg] Man Checking Out Woman's
   Butt
   Then of course quite commonly ... neither gender is particularly subtle

   Looking down towards the ground during conversation serves different
   purposes for men and women. For a man, it lets him give a woman the
   once over. For a woman, it has the dual purpose of letting her check
   him out and at the same time send a submissive signal of looking away
   and down.

    3. The Power Gaze

   Power Gaze
   The Power Gaze

   Imagine the person has a third eye in the center of their forehead and
   look in a triangular area between the person's 'three' eyes. The impact
   this gaze has on the other person has to be experienced to be believed.

   Not only does it change the atmosphere to very serious, it can stop a
   bore dead in their tracks. By keeping your gaze directed at this area,
   you keep the screws firmly on them.

   Provided your gaze doesn't drop below the level of their eyes, the
   pressure will stay on them. Never use this in friendly or romantic
   encounters. But it works a treat on the person who you want to
   intimidate or on the person who simply won't shut up.

    The Power Stare

   If you have soft, weak or wimpy eyes practice using the Power Stare to
   give yourself more authority. When you are under attack from someone,
   try not to blink while maintaining eye contact. When you look at the
   attacker, narrow your eyelids and focus closely on the person. This is
   what predatory animals do just before they strike their prey. When you
   pan your eyes from one person to another without blinking it has an
   unnerving effect on anyone who watches you do it.

   The Terminator
   Don't mess with the Terminator

   To do this, move your eyeballs first and then let your head follow, but
   your shoulders should remain still. The Power Stare was used by Arnold
   Schwarzenegger as The Terminator and can strike fear into the hearts of
   would-be intimidators. Better still, have a policy of dealing only with
   pleasant people so you'll never need to whip out your Power Stare.

  The Politician's Story

   When someone looks around from side to side or will not look us in the
   eye when they talk, our trust in their credibility diminishes
   significantly, even though they may be doing it because of shyness. A
   business associate had a politician as a client who was a novice at
   being interviewed on TV, constantly flicking his eyes between reporters
   and the cameras through an interview. This had the effect of making him
   look shifty-eyed to third party viewers and each time he appeared on TV
   his popularity decreased. Through training him to look at only the
   reporter and ignore the cameras, his credibility increased. Another
   politician was trained to address his answers mainly to the lens of the
   television camera when he participated in a televised political debate.
   While this alienated the 200 studio audience guests it impressed
   millions of television viewers, who felt as if the politician was
   talking directly to them.

  Look Deep Into My Eyes

   A social experiment was conducted using a dating service for a public
   media channel program. A selected number of men were told that a woman
   was well matched to them and that they should expect to have a good
   time on a date. To make this connection interesting, each man was told
   that his date had suffered an injury to one eye as a child which she
   was very sensitive about because the eye didn't track properly. The
   injured eye was unknown these men were told but if he looked closely
   he'd be able to pick it out. Each woman was also told the same story
   about her date and that if she too looked closely she'd be able to spot
   the slow eye. On their dates, the couples spent the evening gazing into
   each other's eyes searching in vain for the 'problem eye'. The outcome
   was that each couple reported high levels of intimacy and romance on
   their dates and the likelihood of the couple meeting again for a second
   date was 200% higher than the dating service average.

  The First 20 Seconds of an Interview

   Many people are taught that, in a sales or job interview, you should
   maintain strong eye contact with the other person and keep it up until
   you are seated. This creates problems for both the interviewer and
   interviewee because it's contrary to the process we like to go through
   when we meet someone new. A man wants to check out a woman's hair,
   legs, body shape and overall presentation. If she maintains eye contact
   it restricts this process so he's left trying to steal glances at her
   during the interview without getting caught and so he becomes
   distracted from the actual job of interviewing. Some women are
   disappointed that, in a supposedly equal business world, men still do
   this, but hidden cameras show this to be a fact of business life
   whether we like it or not.

   Video cameras also reveal that women interviewers go through the same
   evaluation process with both male and female interviewees but women's
   wider peripheral vision means they rarely get caught. Women are also
   more critical than men of female interviewees whose appearance doesn't
   stack up. Women look at a male candidate's hair length, clothes design
   and co-ordination, the creases in his pants and shine on his shoes.
   Most men are completely unaware that women look at the condition of the
   back of his shoes as he walks out.

    Solution

   When you go for an interview, shake hands and then give the interviewer
   a two- to three-second frame of uninterrupted time for them to complete
   the process of looking you over. Look down to open your briefcase or
   folder, or to arrange any papers you might need, turn to hang up your
   coat, or move your chair in closer, and then look up. In filming sales
   interviews, we found that not only did the interviews feel better for
   the salespeople who used this strategy, it added up to a better outcome
   in sales results.

  What Channel Are You Tuned To?

   A person's eye movements can reveal what their mind is focusing on by
   telling you whether they are remembering something they have seen,
   heard, smelled, tasted or touched. This technique is a development of
   American psychologists Grinder and Bandler and is known as
   Neurolinguistic Programming, or NLP.

   In simple terms, if a person is remembering something that they saw,
   their eyes will move upward. If they are recalling something they
   heard, they look to the side and tilt their head as if listening. If
   they are recalling a feeling or emotion, they'll look down and to the
   right. When a person is mentally talking to themselves, they look down
   and to the left.

   Recalling a Picture [filler20.jpg] Recalling a Sound
   Recalling A Picture (up to left) and Recalling A Sound (to left)

   Recalling a Feeling [filler20.jpg] Talking to Oneself
   Recalling A Feeling (down to right) and Talking To Oneself (down to
   left)

   The difficulty is that these eye movements can occur in a fraction of a
   second and come in clusters making it harder to read 'live'. A
   videotape replay, however, can let you see discrepancies between what a
   person says and what they really think.

   Thirty-five per cent of people prefer the visual information channel
   and will use phrases such as 'I see what you mean' 'Can you look into
   that?', 'That's perfectly clear' or 'Can you show me that?' and you
   will get their attention by showing them photos, charts and graphs and
   asking if they 'Get the picture'.

   Twenty-five per cent prefer the auditory channel and use words such as
   'That rings a bell', 'I hear you', 'That doesn't sound right' and that
   they want to be 'in tune' with you. The other 40% prefer the feelings
   channel and will say 'Let's kick that idea around', 'Our department
   needs a shot in the arm', 'I can't quite grasp what you're saying'.
   They love to test drive things and be involved in a demonstration so
   that they can 'grasp the idea'.

  How to Hold Eye Contact with an Audience

   In audiences of up to 50 people it's possible to meet the gaze of each
   individual, letting them feel involved and keeping their attention. In
   larger groups you usually stand further back, so a different approach
   is needed. By pegging a real or imaginary point or person at each
   corner of the group and one in the center, when you stand at a distance
   of 10 yards (10m) from the front row, approximately 20 people in a
   group of up to 50 will feel you are looking at them individually as you
   speak and so you can create an intimate bond with most of your
   audience.

  How to Present Visual Information

   When you are giving a visual presentation using books, charts, graphs
   or a laptop it's important to know how to control where the other
   person is looking. Research shows that of the information relayed to
   the brain in visual presentations, 83% comes via the eyes, 11% via the
   ears, and 6% through the other senses.

   Impact of a Visual Presentation
   Impact on the brain of information from the senses during a visual
   presentation

   A study at the Wharton school in Pennsylvania found that the retention
   of verbal presentations was only 10%. This means that a verbal
   presentation requires frequent repetition of key points to be
   effective. By comparison, the retention rate of combined verbal and
   visual presentations is 50%. This means you will achieve a 400%
   increase in efficiency through the use of visual aids. The study also
   found that using visual aids cuts the average business meeting time
   from 25 minutes to 18 minutes - a 28% time saving.

    The Power Lift

   To keep control of where a person is looking, use a pen to point to the
   presentation and, at the same time, verbalize what he sees. Next, lift
   the pen from the presentation and hold it between his eyes and your
   eyes. This has the magnetic effect of lifting his head so that now he
   is looking at you and he sees and hears what you are saying, achieving
   maximum absorption of your message. Keep the palm of your other hand
   open when you are speaking.

   The Power Lift
   The Power Lift - using the pen to control where a person looks during a
   presentation

   Women hold more direct eye contact than men during presentations,
   especially when they are not talking. When women are talking, however,
   they avert their eyes more than men do.

   Men stare more at women than vice versa and men give less direct eye
   contact when listening to other men than when listening to women.

  Summary

   Where you direct your gaze has a powerful impact on the outcome of a
   face-to-face encounter. If you were a manager who was going to give a
   piece of your mind to an employee who was out of line or a parent
   reprimanding a child, which gaze would you use? If you use Social
   Gazing, the sting would be taken out of your words, regardless of how
   loud or threatening you might try to sound. Social Gazing would weaken
   your words but Intimate Gazing could either intimidate or embarrass
   them. Power Gazing, however, has a powerful effect on the receiver and
   tells them you mean business.

   What men describe as the 'come-on' look that women use relates to a
   sideways glance, dilated pupils and Intimate Gazing. If a woman wants
   to play hard to get, she needs to avoid using an Intimate Gaze and use
   Social Gazing instead. But most men miss a lot of it anyway. To use a
   Power Gaze during courting would leave a man or woman labelled as cold
   or unfriendly. When you use an Intimate Gaze on a potential partner,
   however, you give the game away. Women are expert at sending and
   receiving this gaze but, unfortunately, most men are not. When men use
   the Intimate Gaze it's usually blatantly obvious to women and men are
   generally unaware of having been given an Intimate Gaze by a woman,
   much to the frustration of the woman who gave it.

   Table of Contents, Body Language Dimensions Resources Page
   Previous Section, Body Language Dimensions Next Section, Body Language
   Dimensions
