   #Mark Manson » Feed

   [tr?id=1410048955943360&ev=PageView&noscript=1]

   Skip to content
   My new AI coaching app Purpose is here. Try It Free →

   MARK MANSON MARK MANSON

Menu

   (BUTTON)
     * Articles
     * Books
     * Community
     * Newsletter
     * Podcast
     * Log In

   (BUTTON) My Account
   (BUTTON) My Account
   Log In (BUTTON) Sign Up

Become a member

   Get a single membership for just $6.67 per month
   (BUTTON) Sign Up
   (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON)

The Levels of Eye Contact

   Written ByMark Manson
   Filed Under Dating Advice
   Listen to this article
   00:0000:00
   (BUTTON) (BUTTON) (BUTTON)

   Eye contact is important, especially in dating and gauging people’s
   attraction to you. Everyone should have a basic understanding of what
   each person is eye-coding to them in any given situation, and it
   doesn’t take a cryptographer to figure it out. Or if it does, then fuck
   it, I’m that cryptographer.

   In this article, I will decrypt the 11 levels of eye contact for the
   uninitiated eye. Gone are the days of blindly guessing whether cutie at
   the bar has the hots for you. You will know. And if you don’t, you’ll
   at least have a pretty good idea.

Table of Contents

     * The Power of Eye Contact
     * (Don’t) Avert Your Eyes!
     * The Levels of Eye Contact
     * What Do You See?

The Power of Eye Contact

   Unless you’ve been living under a rock, you’ll have heard the saying,
   “The eyes are the window to the soul,” or some cheesy variation
   thereof.

   Intuitively, we understand the power of eye contact. We’ve all
   experienced that moment when you look into someone’s eyes and see a
   million unspoken words. From the stern look in your mother’s face when
   the five-year-old you broke into the fridge and ate that tub of ice
   cream, to the scrutinizing gaze of the interviewer as you wondered
   whether you answered that last question well enough to secure the job
   of your dreams.

   The power of the gaze is no mystery. There is a wealth of research
   behind it. Here are the highlights of what eye contact does.
    1. It’s arousing. Looking into someone’s eyes will make you
       significantly more aroused than looking at someone whose gaze is
       averted.^1 Simply having someone stare back at you could make you
       all sweaty and shit.^2 This should be obvious even without the
       research: if you want to arouse someone, don’t look at the floor,
       look at them.
    2. It captures and holds attention. If you want to catch someone’s
       attention, suddenly looking at them (even if you don’t move your
       head at all) will tend to do the trick.^3 And if you want the
       person you’re having a conversation with to not be distracted, look
       them in the eye.^4
    3. It makes people believe you. When you tell someone something they
       don’t know to be true, they’ll tend to believe it if you look them
       in the eye. Even if it were something they know not to be true,
       they’ll still be slower to disagree.^5
    4. It makes people think you’re smart. We generally judge people who
       make eye contact with us to be smarter and more competent.^6
    5. It makes you appear more sincere. You’re in the bar hanging with
       your friends. The hottie from the back of the room who’s watching
       you will think you’re more sincere, less anxious, and more relaxed
       the more they see you look at your friends while interacting with
       them.^7

   You don’t have to believe in love at first sight (I don’t), to
   appreciate the power of eye contact. Simply meeting eyes with someone
   won’t make them fall head over heels for you, but it sure will do many
   other things that can turn them from a “maybe” to a “fuck yes.”

Unf*ck Your Relationships

   Dump the toxic relationship cycle with my free mini course on
   attachment styles.

   ____________________
   (BUTTON)
   Get Ebook

   Your information is protected and I never spam, ever. You can view my
   privacy policy here.
   [silhouette.png]

(Don’t) Avert Your Eyes!

   If you’re reading this article, chances are you’re not entirely
   comfortable making eye contact with others. And that’s perfectly
   normal.

   Eye contact can be fucking intimidating. It feels as though we are
   exposing ourselves in some way, like we’re naked.

   Generally, people find eye contact difficult for many reasons. Some
   suffer from trauma. Some have attachment and intimacy issues. Some are
   uncomfortable with who they are and therefore don’t wish to be seen.
   Some may have something to hide. And others may simply be shy, or
   inexperienced.

   The goal of this guide is to peel the layers of eye contact and reveal
   to you a simple yet powerful action that anyone—yourself included—can
   master.

The Levels of Eye Contact

   Here is an entirely overly-analytical, and
   mostly-satirical-but-kinda-true-too guide to the levels of eye contact
   and what sort of attraction it means.

Level (-1): No Eye Contact (Intentional)

   Beyond the lowest level of eye contact, this is when someone is not
   only not making eye contact with you, but they’re consciously making an
   effort to NOT look at you. In the heights of sexual intimacy, Level
   (-1) is subterranean. It’s a person’s way of saying, “Get away from me,
   creep,” without, you know, actually saying it.

   This eye contact (or lack thereof) is typically reserved for the horny
   mouth-breathers who stare at a girl’s tits, obnoxious drunk guys in
   full-on bro mode, the crazed ex-girlfriend stalker, or any other
   potential psycho in one’s vicinity.

   Level (-1) eye contact can also occur within a conversation. Just
   because he or she is responding to you verbally doesn’t mean you’re out
   of the gates yet. Put simply, if someone is intentionally making an
   effort to NOT look at you, they’re not interested. It’s the
   anti-intimacy. The non-verbal cue for “Give it up… and go the fuck away
   from me.”

   That or you have some mustard on your face.

Level 0: No Eye Contact (Unintentional)

   An unintentional absence of eye contact signals a lack of knowledge you
   exist. It means nothing other than they haven’t noticed you. Either
   they’re busy and focusing on something else, or you’re about as
   intriguing to look at as grandma’s wallpaper.

Level 1: Glance (Unconscious)

   An unconscious glance is that moment when someone looks up at you and
   then immediately looks away, although they’re not aware of what they’re
   looking at. It’s basically when their eyes are wandering around and
   coincidentally meet yours for a moment and then continue wandering.

   The key here is that he or she is not aware of your eyes meeting and
   therefore nothing is registering to them as particularly interesting or
   enticing in that moment. Just like Level 0, this level of eye contact
   is neutral and there’s not much to take away from it. Most people
   aren’t paying attention to what they’re looking at most of the time.

Level 2: Glance (Conscious)

   The second level of eye contact is the first type of eye contact where
   you’ve possibly made a positive impression on a person. This is when
   your eyes and theirs happen to meet and then they look away
   immediately, except they look away consciously, whether it be because
   of shyness, awkwardness, or disinterest.

   Body language studies claim that a person who breaks eye contact with
   you by looking down is intimidated (i.e., attracted) and a person who
   breaks eye contact by looking to the side is indifferent (i.e., not
   attracted).^8

   I have no idea if this is true or not. But if someone breaks eye
   contact with you quickly and intentionally, it’s usually a polarized
   response: they’re either attracted and momentarily self-conscious by
   your presence, or they’re uninterested and avoiding making contact
   altogether.

   Most people are not comfortable holding eye contact with strangers,
   what would signal the interest here is that their eyes were drawn to
   you in the first place. So it’s not the breaking it so much that is
   important, what’s important is that they consciously looked at you.

   Differentiating between Level 2 eye contact and Level 1 eye contact is
   subtle and hard to do consistently with any sort of accuracy. Although
   you do pick up some acuity over time. It’s impossible to ever be 100%
   certain what someone else’s intentions are, so why not just assume
   everyone who makes strong eye contact with you is attracted until
   proven otherwise?

   A good exercise for someone who is new or shy is to practice never
   breaking eye contact with people before they break it with you. Walk
   around all day and make eye contact with people you find interesting or
   attractive. You’ll feel uncomfortable making eye contact with
   strangers, but that’s the idea. Keep doing it until it feels natural.
   It will help your confidence.

Level 3: Glance and a Half

   Level 3 is the first level where interest is conveyed, ever so
   slightly. Like the other lower levels of eye contact, the
   glance-and-a-half is subtle and difficult to notice without a lot of
   practice. It’s when someone looks at you and breaks eye contact as they
   normally do, but they hold the eye contact for a split second longer
   than is normal. I’m talking maybe 1/4 of a second longer.

   Whereas Level 2 eye contact may last half a second, Level 3 will last
   3/4 of a second. It’s subtle, it’s short, and it’s unconscious. Humans
   are wired to spend more time looking at things they find attractive on
   an unconscious level. So in their mind, they’re still breaking eye
   contact with you, but in practice, they’re actually looking at you 50%
   longer than they would normally.

   It took me a while to start picking up on Level 3 eye contact. Level 3
   happens most often when they are consciously focused on something else,
   such as on their cell phone or talking to somebody they’re with. They
   don’t realize that they’re looking at you, though they totally are. Any
   eye contact from Level 3 upwards should be a strong incentive for the
   two of you to at least have a conversation.

Level 4: Double Glance

   Here’s a good habit to get yourself into once you’re able to maintain
   eye contact with people walking around. Any time you make eye contact
   with someone attractive and they look away, keep looking at them for
   another few seconds. A percentage of them will look at you a second
   time. In my experience, this is a clear sign of physical interest, and
   95%+ of the subsequent interactions you initiate with this person will
   be received warmly.

   Girl in tunnel turning around looking at camera giving eye contact
   attraction

   What’s funny is that even on Level 4 eye contact, most people are not
   conscious that they’re doing it. I’ve approached women who have looked
   at me twice in a row and I mentioned that I saw them look at me, and
   they seriously didn’t remember looking at me. I’ve even said, “We did
   an eye contact thing. We made eye contact like three times in a row,
   you didn’t notice?” And they didn’t… or they were lying scumbags.
   Either way, just goes to show how most people are off in their own
   little world not thinking about any of this stuff.

   Regardless, the unconscious mind is always seeking out things it finds
   interesting or intriguing, so if their eyes keep falling on you, it’s a
   sign.

Level 5: The Gaze

   The Gaze is the last level that can occur unconsciously although it’s
   usually conscious. This is when someone looks at you and just keeps
   looking at you past the normal “look away” moment. This is a solid 2-3
   seconds of eye contact without them breaking it. When undesired, this
   becomes the infamous “creep stare.” But in the cases of desirable
   people looking at you, this is extremely good news.

   This is why it’s so important to get in the habit of being able to hold
   eye contact because otherwise, you’ll miss out on all of the people
   giving you Level 3-5 eye contact. The Gaze is a clear and large sign of
   interest. You’d be pretty dumb to pass up this signal.

   Girl in street looking at camera

Level 6: The Smile

   The sixth level of eye contact is The Gaze plus a smile. If The Gaze is
   a clear sign telling you that they’re interested, throwing a smile on
   top of it may as well be a neon flashing billboard. If someone you find
   attractive gives you Level 6 and you don’t talk to them, not only are
   you an idiot, but you probably have some serious anxiety going on.

Level 7: The Eye Fuck

   This is someone who makes eye contact, holds it, smiles, and then never
   stops. They just keep staring and smiling, and staring and smiling,
   sometimes for minutes at a time.

   Eye fucking is the first level of eye contact that makes the leap from
   “interested/curious” to “they want to have sex with me.” Eye fucking
   doesn’t withhold any intentions. It’s about as much interest as one can
   possibly display through eye contact alone. If you get eye fucked by an
   attractive person and don’t act on it, you’re probably blind or
   mid-seizure. I can’t think of any other reasonable explanation.^9

   When undesired, The Eye Fuck is exceedingly creepy. If you’re a man and
   you regularly eye fuck women who do not reciprocate or smile back, then
   you will likely meet Mr. Pepper Spray in your near future.

   Eye fuckers will often end up approaching you if you don’t approach.
   Although many of them will give up if you don’t approach for a few
   minutes and assume you’re not interested. If you’re a man and a woman
   is eye fucking you, the hint should be clear: she wants you to talk to
   her.

Level 8: The Dreamboat

   The Dreamboat happens when someone has fallen for you. This is when you
   wake up in the morning to someone staring at you with that dreamy smile
   like they’re drunk or stayed up all night sniffing glue. It’s the way
   two people look at each other when cuddling and making cutesy noises
   while rubbing their noses together.

   The Dreamboat almost never happens before you’ve had sex with someone,
   and if it does, they’re either Amish or it’s a giant red flag. Usually,
   it starts happening a month or two into a new relationship, although it
   can happen in as little as a couple nights together (or in rare
   circumstances, one).

   Man giving eye contact

   Assuming the feeling is mutual, The Dreamboat is amazing. It’s the most
   validating eye contact a person can give you. Centuries of literature
   and million-dollar films have thrived off of what The Dreamboat stare
   signifies. It’s what we humans are obsessed with on some level. And
   whether we like to admit it or not, it’s what most of us are after in
   the long-run. So when you find it, enjoy it.

   But… if the feeling is not mutual, if The Dreamboat is a one-way
   street, it’s not always such a pleasant experience. Unrequited love is
   no fun for anybody. Nobody likes to break a heart and make those eyes
   cry. Just be honest and upfront, break things off with respect and
   dignity, and hope that their eyes don’t morph into…

   Crazy funny man opened his eyes isolated on a white background

Level 9: The Crazies

   The 9th and final level of eye contact cannot be explained as much as
   experienced.

   When you experience The Crazies, a person doesn’t even have to be
   present to see them. They haunt you. They’re everywhere and nowhere.

   It’s the guy who wakes you up by banging on your window at 3AM crying
   that you never called him back. Or the girl who faked being pregnant
   because she thought it’d get you to get back together with her. Or the
   guy who carved your name into his arm as a birthday present.

   They’re the eyes that look at you in earnest when they say they want to
   quit their job and move to Tahiti so that you two can be together,
   perfectly alone, forever. The Crazies signify delusion, hopeless
   emotion, and the complete loss of a grip on reality. The Crazies often
   come with a restraining order.

   People who have seen The Crazies and lived to tell do so with a level
   of humility and despondence. Most have dealt with their share of
   irrational and dramatic relationships. Some have perhaps witnessed The
   Crazies for fleeting moments—an enraged girlfriend who ran around at
   him with a baseball bat, the guy who left her 43 angry voicemails in
   one night—and these people pass these stories of insanity around almost
   as a badge of honor.

   But most of those who have seen the depths, looked into the eyes and
   seen the true amorous insanity behind them, like any true veteran
   prefer to keep the pain and horror stowed away in their hearts, not to
   see the light of day.

   They say all is fair in love and war, and in certain places and at
   certain times, the two don’t feel so different. And like any war story,
   living it and telling it do neither justice.

What Do You See?

   Humans have a tendency to make things more difficult than they have to
   be. When we’re not sure we can do something, we put it off. We turn
   whatever “it” is into a 12-headed hydra that haunts our every waking
   moment. But if we’d just gone ahead and done it, we would have
   discovered “it” wasn’t so bad after all.

   Eye contact is one such “it.” Unless you have a pathological fear, in
   which case you’d better seek professional help, eye contact is
   something you can practice and get good at.

   If making eye contact with strangers is one level too far, you can
   begin with people you feel comfortable with. Next time you’re listening
   to your best friend tell you about their day, look into their eyes
   rather than at their ears,^10 or at the wall behind them. Next time
   your partner is giving you The Dreamboat, curl up in it and let it take
   you out to sea. Drift away to its loving tunes.^11

   Another easy trick is: if you feel uncomfortable looking into someone’s
   eyes, stand or sit a little further away from them. Research shows that
   the closer you stand to someone looking at you, the less you’re able to
   make eye contact, especially if the other person is of the opposite
   sex.^12 Find that sweet spot that works for you.

   Practice your eye contact. Learn to decode the 11 levels. Let your eyes
   be the windows to your soul. And your dating life will never be the
   same again.

Recommended Articles

   If you liked this article, you’re going to love these bad boys. Dig in
   and upgrade your dating life. (Or not, whatever works. Imma just stare
   at you with ma Crazies until you capitulate under my gaze…)
     * Love Is Not Enough
     * Fuck Yes or No
     * 1,500 People Give All the Relationship Advice You’ll Ever Need
     * 6 Healthy Relationship Habits Most People Think Are Toxic
     * 6 Signs You’re in a Toxic Relationship
     * How to Let Go

   Footnotes

    1. Jarick, M., & Bencic, R. (2019). Eye Contact Is a Two-Way Street:
       Arousal Is Elicited by the Sending and Receiving of Eye Gaze
       Information. Frontiers in Psychology, 10, 1262.↵
    2. Nichols, K. A., & Champness, B. G. (1971). Eye gaze and the GSR.
       Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 7(6), 623–626.↵
    3. van der Wel, R. P., Welsh, T., & Böckler, A. (2018). Talking heads
       or talking eyes? Effects of head orientation and sudden onset gaze
       cues on attention capture. Attention, Perception, & Psychophysics,
       80(1), 1–6.↵
    4. Senju, A., & Hasegawa, T. (2005). Direct gaze captures visuospatial
       attention. Visual Cognition, 12(1), 127–144.↵
    5. Kreysa, H., Kessler, L., & Schweinberger, S. R. (2016). Direct
       Speaker Gaze Promotes Trust in Truth-Ambiguous Statements. PLOS
       ONE, 11(9), e0162291.↵
    6. Wheeler, R. W., Baron, J. C., Michell, S., & Ginsburg, H. J.
       (1979). Eye contact and the perception of intelligence. Bulletin of
       the Psychonomic Society, 13(2), 101–102.↵
    7. Iizuka, Y. (1992). Evaluation of Gaze Pairs by Female Observers.
       The Japanese Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 31(3),
       231–239.↵
    8. See for example: here, here, and here.↵
    9. Ah, you’re in a committed monogamous relationship and don’t want to
       cheat. That’s a reasonable explanation. Yeah, good for you.↵
   10. Seriously, dude, it’s fucking weird when people do that.↵
   11. Research shows the more in love a couple is, the more time they
       spend gazing into each other’s loved up eyes. Revel in it. Don’t
       break the spell.↵
   12. Argyle, M., & Dean, J. (1965). Eye-Contact, Distance and
       Affiliation. Sociometry, 28(3), 289–304.↵

Unf*ck Your Relationships

   Dump the toxic relationship cycle with my free mini course on
   attachment styles.

   ____________________
   (BUTTON)
   Get Ebook

   Your information is protected and I never spam, ever. You can view my
   privacy policy here.

About the Author

   Mark is the three-time #1 New York Times bestselling author of The
   Subtle Art of Not Giving a F*ck as well as other titles. His books have
   sold around 20 million copies, been translated into more than 65
   languages, and reached number one in more than a dozen countries. In
   2023, a feature film about his life and ideas was released worldwide by
   Universal Pictures.
   (BUTTON) Learn More About Mark
   1. Jarick, M., & Bencic, R. (2019). Eye Contact Is a Two-Way Street:
   Arousal Is Elicited by the Sending and Receiving of Eye Gaze
   Information. Frontiers in Psychology, 10, 1262.↵ 2. Nichols, K. A., &
   Champness, B. G. (1971). Eye gaze and the GSR. Journal of Experimental
   Social Psychology, 7(6), 623–626.↵ 3. van der Wel, R. P., Welsh, T., &
   Böckler, A. (2018). Talking heads or talking eyes? Effects of head
   orientation and sudden onset gaze cues on attention capture. Attention,
   Perception, & Psychophysics, 80(1), 1–6.↵ 4. Senju, A., & Hasegawa, T.
   (2005). Direct gaze captures visuospatial attention. Visual Cognition,
   12(1), 127–144.↵ 5. Kreysa, H., Kessler, L., & Schweinberger, S. R.
   (2016). Direct Speaker Gaze Promotes Trust in Truth-Ambiguous
   Statements. PLOS ONE, 11(9), e0162291.↵ 6. Wheeler, R. W., Baron, J.
   C., Michell, S., & Ginsburg, H. J. (1979). Eye contact and the
   perception of intelligence. Bulletin of the Psychonomic Society, 13(2),
   101–102.↵ 7. Iizuka, Y. (1992). Evaluation of Gaze Pairs by Female
   Observers. The Japanese Journal of Experimental Social Psychology,
   31(3), 231–239.↵ 8. See for example: here, here, and here.↵ 9. Ah,
   you’re in a committed monogamous relationship and don’t want to cheat.
   That’s a reasonable explanation. Yeah, good for you.↵ 10. Seriously,
   dude, it’s fucking weird when people do that.↵ 11. Research shows the
   more in love a couple is, the more time they spend gazing into each
   other’s loved up eyes. Revel in it. Don’t break the spell.↵ 12. Argyle,
   M., & Dean, J. (1965). Eye-Contact, Distance and Affiliation.
   Sociometry, 28(3), 289–304.↵

MORE ARTICLES

     * 20 Paradoxes That Are True
     * How to Deal With Regret
     * No, It's Not All Your Parents' Fault
     * Why Skills Matter More Than Goals
     * Screw Finding Your Passion
     * The Real Value of Money

   (BUTTON) VIEW ALL ARTICLES

   MARK MANSON

   Mark is the three-time #1 New York Times bestselling author of The
   Subtle Art of Not Giving a F*ck, as well as other titles. His books
   have sold around 20 million copies, been translated into more than 65
   languages, and reached number one in more than a dozen countries. In
   2023, a feature film about his life and ideas was released worldwide by
   Universal Pictures.
   (BUTTON) Learn More About Mark
   © 2026 Infinity Squared Media LLC
     * Articles
     * Books
     * Community
     * Newsletter
     * Podcast
     * About Mark
     * Sign Up
     * Contact
     * Sponsorships
     * Purpose App

   Privacy Policy (BUTTON) Manage Cookie Settings Your Privacy Choices
   Terms and Conditions
   © 2026 Infinity Squared Media LLC

   [exit-intent-illustration.png]
   (BUTTON)

Wait! Here Are 3 Ideas That Might Change Your Life

   Learn about the idea that transformed a depressed deadbeat into one of
   the most important philosophers who ever lived. Read about it in my
   free 19-page ebook.

   ____________________
   (BUTTON)
   Unlock Ebook
   (BUTTON) I'm not interested.
