
   (BUTTON) (BUTTON)
   (BUTTON) Subscribe (BUTTON) Sign in

Putting an End to the Male vs. Female Gaze

   Jennifer Rabin's avatar
   Jennifer Rabin
   Jan 11, 2022
--
   (BUTTON)
   6
   (BUTTON) (BUTTON)

   Much has been written about the male vs. the female gaze in art—most
   commonly in film, photography, literature, and figurative visual art—as
   a framework to understand the way an artist depicts another person as
   well as the effect that that depiction has on the viewer. Historically,
   we consider the male gaze as one that empowers men while objectifying
   and subjugating women for men’s pleasure. The female gaze casts women
   more frequently as subjects (instead of objects) and, in cases when
   women do appear as objects of attention or desire, it imbues them with
   agency and autonomy.

   But there’s a problem with this framework: it’s tied to the sex of the
   artist/storyteller. For example, I’ve read discussions about the female
   gaze that speak of women storytellers subverting the male gaze by
   objectifying the men in their stories as a way of taking back or
   flipping the narrative. I would argue that a simple role
   reversal—putting women behind the lens to subjugate men—does not change
   the nature of the gaze. Objectification, of anyone, is a quality of the
   male gaze.

   To go deeper into this conversation, we need to be thoughtful about the
   language we use. The terms “male” and “female” don’t actually work
   because they relate to limited understandings of biological sex, which
--
   When we speak about the masculine and the feminine, we are speaking of
   universal forces that oppose and balance each other—much like yin and
   yang or Shiva and Shakti—and which exist in different iterations in
   cultures and mythologies throughout the world. The idea of a “male” or
   a “female” gaze propagates a false binary when, in fact, most artists
   use a mixture of masculine and feminine approaches to art making.
   (BUTTON) (BUTTON)

   By embracing a framework that identifies masculine and feminine
--
   interested in—or began to understand—the ways that the masculine and
   the feminine show up in the process of creating work.

   The film itself—which you should watch it if you’re so inclined—is a
   revelation of the feminine gaze. The direction portrays each female
   character as both subject and object, and all are presented in a close,
   intimate, subjective style that is searching and elliptical and without
   straight answers.

--
   (BUTTON)

   I am reminded of an audition process a conductor friend of mine once
   explained. The musician plays their instrument and chosen piece behind
   a screen. Hence no gaze and no gender-based decision on whom to hire.
   It becomes all about the music (art).
   Expand full comment
   Reply
   Share
