     * Search in PubMed
     * View in NLM Catalog
     * Add to search

‘The medical gaze’: Foucault, anthropology and contemporary psychiatry in
Ireland

   Aoife K O’Callaghan

--
   PMCID: PMC9308586  PMID: 34374939

Abstract

   Michel Foucault developed the concept of ‘the medical gaze’, describing
   how doctors fit a patient’s story into a ‘biomedical paradigm,
   filtering out what is deemed as irrelevant material’ (Misselbrook,
   2013). Doctors are perceived within this model to focus on selecting
   the biomedical elements of patients’ problems only, filtering out all
--
   Keywords: Foucault, Medical anthropology, Psychiatry

Introduction

   What is the medical gaze? Michel Foucault developed the concept of ‘the
   medical gaze’, describing how doctors fit a patient’s story into a
   ‘biomedical paradigm, filtering out what is deemed as irrelevant
   material’ [1]. Doctors are perceived within this model to focus on
   selecting the biomedical elements of patients’ problems, but this paper
   argues that in the subspecialty of psychiatry, this is not the case,
--
   purely objective science [6]. He described the move from
   person-orientated to object-orientated to laboratory medicine, which he
   described in his work The disappearance of the sick-man from medical
   cosmology, 1770–1870 [8]. This corresponds with the emergence of
   Foucault’s described clinical gaze, which no longer views the patient
   as a whole but instead as a series of disconnected parts.

Medical systems and socio-cultural contexts

--
   ‘medicine deals with two kinds of reality, “scientific” and “ordinary”;
   both a biophysical and human science’ [7]. Medical systems do exist in
   socio-cultural contexts, and ‘the experience of illness is a cultural
   or symbolic reality’ [7]. Kleinman argued that the narrow traditional
   medical gaze exists in a system which is ‘an ordered, coherent body of
   ideas, values, and practices embedded in a given cultural context from
   which it derives its signification’ [7]. While there is an assumption
   of power on the behalf of the clinician, ‘the acts of ordering, naming,
   interpreting, and offering therapy for illness are aspects of symbolic
--
   Kleinman argued that there are ‘systematic attempts to restrict
   medicine’s symbolic reality to a single discipline, psychiatry,
   peripheral to the central core of medical research interests and
   practices’ [7]. Kleinmann recognised that psychiatry retains the wider
   biopsychosocial gaze that is missing in Foucault’s medical gaze,
   despite its narrow diagnostic classificatory systems.

Patient narratives of illness

   The medical model and its use in the medical gaze ties in with
   rationalism, black-and-white thinking and beliefs within Western
   medicine. Byron J. Good, a medical anthropologist, defined the primary
   role of clinical medicine as ‘the interpretation of the patient’s
   symptoms by relating them to their functional and structural sources in
--
   society which is becoming more diverse.

Conclusion

   Foucault’s concept of the medical gaze is not relevant to the modern
   psychiatric clinician. The power he speaks of exists only in the
   initial period of a patients’ illnesses as a treatment tool. While the
   medical gaze ties clinicians to the use of narrow diagnostic criteria
   in the treatment of patients, focus should instead be on individualised
   treatment of the suffering and distress of every individual. It is both
   increasingly important and difficult for psychiatry services to retain
   this open perspective to treatment of suffering and distress in a
