     * Sign Up Free

   type in your search and press enter
   ____________________
   What is the Male Gaze Definition and Examples in Film - StudioBinder
   What is the Male Gaze Definition and Examples in Film - StudioBinder
     * Film Theory

What is the Male Gaze? Definition and Examples in Film

   By Kim Leonard on April 25, 2021

   Whenever you hear someone talking about the male gaze, you may be
   asking yourself, “What is the male gaze?” Well, in this post we’re
   going to tell you. We’re going to explain what we mean by the term “the
   male gaze” and we’ll show you some examples from recent films. We’ll
   also give you some suggestions for how you can subvert the male gaze
   and create a more balanced visual narrative.

Theory

Where did the male gaze come from?

   What is the male gaze? Filmmaker and theorist Laura Mulvey first coined
   the term “the male gaze” in her seminal 1973 paper Visual Pleasure and
   Narrative Cinema. Mulvey’s essay, published two years later in Screen
   magazine, was written for an academic audience so it can be a little
   difficult to understand.

   Let’s try to break down her main points, one by one.

THE MALE GAZE

   “In a world ordered by sexual imbalance, pleasure in looking has been
   split between active/male and passive/female.”

--

   While we may or may not agree with that idea, it’s important to
   understand for getting into Mulvey’s next point.

THE MALE GAZE

   “The determining male gaze projects its fantasy onto the female figure…
   with [her] appearance coded for strong visual and erotic impact.”

   “The determining male gaze” is what happens when we put it all
   together.

   Men writing the films, men making the films, men being the
   protagonists, and men being the target audience all combine into a
   unified — heterosexual male — perspective of female characters.

   In other words, we all been conditioned to adopt the male gaze because
   that is the way we were “raised” by traditional cinema.

THE MALE GAZE

   “Traditionally, the woman displayed has functioned on two levels: as
   erotic object for the characters within the screen story, and as erotic
   object for the spectator within the [cinema] auditorium.”
--
   Gisele (Gal Gadot) and Han (Sung Kang) have been tasked with getting
   the bad guy’s fingerprints.

   This scene is a perfect illustration of what each aspect of Laura
   Mulvey’s male gaze looks like in practice.

   Notice how the very first thing Gisele does to accomplish her part of
   the mission is strip down to her bikini. Next, the camera shifts to
   super sexy slo-mo to catch each tiny movement Gisele’s body makes —
--
   that it’s her idea, even. But in fact, the character of Gisele is being
   used to achieve something the male protagonist needs.

   Now that we have a sense of what to look for, let’s practice being able
   to recognize the male gaze.

Practice

Recognize the male gaze

   We know that the male gaze objectifies female characters. But more
   importantly, the male gaze also reaffirms the power of the Patriarchy
   to use women as props in service of the heterosexual male narrative.
   What is the Male Gaze - Mulvey Quotes Director Budd Boetticher What is
   the Male Gaze - Mulvey Quotes Director Budd Boetticher

Mulvey quotes director Budd Boetticher

   In other words, a female character doesn’t have to be overly sexualized
   to be the object of the male gaze, Mulvey explains. What matters is
   that she incites (passive) the male protagonist to take action (active)
   toward his ultimate goal.

   Mulvey wrote her essay some 50 years ago, so she was mostly referring
--
   And to Aladdin (Mena Massoud), the hero, Jasmine is a prize to be won.
   Which he ultimately does, with the help of his trusty sidekick, Genie
   (Will Smith).

   The other element of the male gaze we need to talk about is the camera
   itself. Where we place the camera, and what we include in the frame
   (camera framing), is just as important to how we view female characters
   as the way they are written in the screenplay.

--
   no slo-mo, no binoculars. In fact, the cross cutting between Bond
   (Daniel Craig) and the woman with the horse (Catarina Murino) tells us
   that they make eye contact, not that she’s ogling his body.

   Okay, so now that we know what the male gaze looks like, even when it’s
   not overtly sexual, what can we do to switch things up?

Innovate

Subvert the male gaze

   We subvert something by taking away its power, especially in the
   context of a long-accepted social construct, like the Patriarchy. With
   this in mind, how can we subvert the male gaze in our filmmaking
   choices?

   One way is to draw attention to it; and a good way to do that is by
   swapping genders. Take a role a woman always plays and cast a man
   instead.
   What is the Male Gaze - Marllyn Monroe The Archetypical Bimbo What is
   the Male Gaze - Marllyn Monroe The Archetypical Bimbo

Marilyn Monroe  •  The Archetypical Bimbo

   For example, the Bimbo is a character women have been playing since
--
   She is sometimes the “love interest” (i.e., lusted after) for one of
   the male characters, but her main purpose in the story is eye candy for
   the male audience members.

   Ghostbusters subverts the male gaze by casting Chris Hemsworth to play
   the Bimbo instead. Hemsworth’s Kevin Beckman is the only male of the
   group, is lusted after by Erin (Kristen Wiig), and he’s dumber than a
   box of rocks.

The Receptionist  •  Ghostbusters

   Kevin also gets possessed in the final act of the film by the (dead)
   bad guy, Rowan — which is still very much a part of the usual male gaze
   tropes. Doing something to the “love interest” is a standard plot point
   that draws out the hero to the final confrontation.

Kevin Possessed  •  Ghostbusters
--
   common, it’s immediately recognizable. Similar to a cliché, but not
   necessarily with the same negative connotations.

   Jumanji: Welcome to the Jungle also does a good job of subverting the
   male gaze. In this story, a group of high schoolers are magically
   sucked into a video game where they appear as their game avatars.

   This means casting adult actors to play teenagers. Jack Black plays the
   avatar (“Shelly Oberon”) chosen by Bethany (Madison Iseman).
--
   distance waiting for their chance.

Martha's Sexy Dance Fighting  •  Jumanji

   This scene subverts the male gaze on multiple fronts. First, because
   the teenage Martha has no idea or experience of how to be “sexy.” So
   she does her best to imitate the tropes we’ve already discussed.

   Meanwhile, the camera simulates watching her through binoculars, giving
--
   Another Day. But unlike Bond, Martha’s friends are not titillated by
   her body in the slightest.

   In fact, they express concern for her well-being. What’s more, the
   “non-player character” guards are totally ignorant of the male gaze and
   so are incapable of even understanding what Martha is doing.

Conclusion

Remember these things

   So, let’s recap. The main thing to remember about Laura Mulvey’s male
   gaze is that it’s the perspective of the heterosexual male fantasy.

   In writing, the male is the strong, confident protagonist and the
   female characters are there to serve his story. Female characters can
   be overly sexualized objects of desire, or simply there to tend to his
   wounds and support him in reaching his goal.

   In filming, the male gaze is represented by the camera. It lingers over
   the female body in ways meant to titillate both the male protagonist
   and the audience. It frames the female body in sections and dehumanizes
   her.

UP NEXT

How to avoid stereotypes in movies

   The same way the male gaze promotes a certain ideology about females
   characters, other stereotypes also persist. Let's briefly go over the
   stereotypes that the film industry has perpetuated along with some
   films and TV shows that are redefining the cultural landscape.

