     * Blog

   May 30, 2024

The Female Gaze Explained Simply- with examples

What is the Female Gaze?

   The female gaze is a term that’s typically used in film, but I believe
   it can and should be applied to other parts of our life from the music
   we listen to, to the art that we view. Allow me to introduce- Female
   Gaze Photography. It would probably help to know what the female gaze
   is, so let me explain it in simple terms.

   The male gaze is the way that typically men view the world whereas the
   female gaze is the way women typically view the world, but it’s deeper
   than that. The male gaze seeks to sexualize and objectify the subject-
   typically women. You might think that the female gaze seeks to view men
   in the same demoralizing and objectifying way that men typically view
   us, but you’d be wrong. Instead of objectifying men, the female gaze
   focuses on the emotions, feelings, and atmosphere of the subject. This
   might sound a little confusing in theory so let me show an example or
   two.

The Epitome of the Male Gaze

   This photo was taken of Hugh Jackman as Wolverine. It shows his huge
   muscles and those little spikey things coming out of his hands. His
   face is angry. His muscles are veiny. His skin looks sweaty. Everything
   about his posing and expressions feels very aggressive and
   in-your-face. Even just the words and fonts on this magazine cover are
   quite aggressive. SHREDDED! BIG BACK! GET OUT! The font is bold. The
   colors are bold. Even the little photo at the top- want abs like these?
   It’s the epitome of the male gaze.
   Hugh Jackman as wolverine on the cover of a magazine representing the
   male gaze

The Epitome of the Female Gaze

   In contrast, this photo is of the same Hugh Jackman, but it couldn’t
   look more different. His face is clean shaven. He’s wearing a soft
   sweater with a soft blue color. His hands are on his hips in a more
   neutral position rather than in a gross and threatening manner from the
   other magazine. He’s got a soft smile. His hair is well managed, but a
   little messy. The fonts are gentler. The colors are more subtle. Even
   the words on this magazine cover are softer. “The Joy of Keepsakes.”
   and “Recipe for romance.” The epitome of the female gaze.
   Hugh Jackman on a magazine representing the female gaze

So why does this matter?

   In a world and more specifically a country that has been fighting
   mercilessly to take our rights away, it’s even more important now to
   have media that represents the way literally anyone but straight white
   men view the world. But even more than that, I think it’s valuable for
   us as women to be able to see ourselves the way we view others, which
   is why I created Female Gaze Photography. I’ve explained that in
   another blog post that I’ll link here:
   Female Gaze photography Blog post

6 Female Gaze Photos taken by Me

   portrait woman running and laughing in orange tulle dress field of tall
   green grass
   Portrait woman painting in field in Washington
--
   foreground
   Portrait young woman in white dress dancing in tall grassy field in
   washington state

If you want female gaze photos of yourself

   Inquire here!

Related Posts
