
   Sign in
   (BUTTON)

From the Waist Up: The Male Gaze vs the Female Gaze

   sophia slade
   sophia slade
   9 min read
--
   loved the Narnia and Lord of the Rings movies arguably more than the
   books. Movies, especially science fiction and fantasy ones, were and
   are a central part of my life.

   That said, many of them are shot in the male gaze.

   So what is the male gaze?

   According to The Conversation, in film, the male gaze “invokes the
   sexual politics of the gaze and suggests a sexualized way of looking
   that empowers men and objectifies women…(the) woman is visually
   positioned as an ‘object’ of heterosexual male desire.”
   Press enter or click to view image in full size
   X-Men: First Class (2011)
--
   Black Widow (2021)

   On the surface, they might not seem too different. They both show Nat
   advancing on the viewer. They both show her full body in her iconic
   suit. But closer examination reveals the male gaze on full display in
   the Winter Soldier poster.

   First, check out her actual gaze. In the Winter Solider poster, Nat
   stares into oblivion with glassy eyes. Now, look at her eyes in the
   Black Widow poster. She stares the audience down, daring you to fuck
   with her.

--
   looks like she stepped out of a Pantene commercial. Her hair in the
   Black Widow promo is braided. It looks cool, but the style is also
   practical.

   Her body is the biggest tipoff that we’re peering through the male gaze
   in Winter Solider. Her waist has been photoshopped to be
   unrealistically tiny and her breasts are inflated. They’re also resting
   at an angle that defies the laws of physics, but I digress. Her arms
   are splayed, leaving her chest exposed and breaking rule number one of
--
   do a great job of not making their female characters 1D sex dolls or
   fodder for the development of the male protagonist.

   The trouble is, for every one of these subversive films, there are ten
   films that fall into the trap of the male gaze.

   Suicide Squad (2016) is a notorious example but is far from the only DC
   movie with this issue. Selina Kyle in The Dark Knight Rises (2012) is a
   compelling character, but as writer Janice Loreck puts it, “is still
--
   The Social Network (2011), 500 Days of Summer (2006), Red Sparrow
   (2019), Passangers (2016), Jurassic World (2015), Grease (1978), Kick
   Ass (2010).

   Oh, and don’t even get me started on the male gaze in horror. I swear
   if I have to watch one more woman get sexually assaulted and tortured
   to give the man something to be angry about I’m going to lose it.
   Press enter or click to view image in full size
   Irréversable (2002)
--
   differences in costume, in the size of their speaking roles. Ask
   yourself if these female characters would even exist if not to benefit
   the male protagonist.

   And the thing is, I don’t think the male gaze is present in the
   objectification of women on screen alone. We also see it in the way men
   are portrayed.

   The majority of the leading men in action movies are, in academic
--
   girl on their arm at all times.

   You could make the argument that shirtless scenes with Thor are present
   for heterosexual female audiences, and you might be right. However, I
   would posit that this is not the female gaze at play, but the male.
   Press enter or click to view image in full size
   Age of Ultron (2012)

   When the male gaze is directed at female characters, the male audience
   gets to imagine themselves getting the girl. But when the male gaze is
   cast on the male protagonist, it becomes not about the desire to have,
   but the desire to be. The archetypal male hero is thus not a female
   fantasy, but a male one. It is who Hollywood tells men they ought to
   want to be.
--
   told “look this way and you will get the girl” when in reality, most
   people I know who are attracted to men are not looking for a hulked-out
   gym bro. A lot of us prefer skinny guys, or dad bods, or women.

   Which leads us to the female gaze.
   Press enter or click to view image in full size
   The Miseducation of Cameron Post (2018)

   The female gaze is not easily defined. After all, it is still a
   relatively new concept. It was only in the 70s that the idea of the
   female gaze came into existence as a subversion of its counterpart.
   Furthermore, these are broad concepts that do not always take into
   account things like race, sexuality, and the experiences of transgender
   and nonbinary people.

   That said, there are signs of the female gaze that crop up in film time
   and time again.

   As director Ashley Connor puts it, “the ‘female gaze’ is more a frame
   of mind, where the approach to subject material is more emotional and
   respectful…”

   It is not only free of slow pans over the ass, gunslingers in bikini
   armor, and love interests killed off to catapult the male protagonist
   into heroism. The female gaze is blooming with empathy and intimacy. It
   can be brutal but does not make itself so to sate a thirst for
   violence. It shows women, and characters of all genders, as real
   people.
   Press enter or click to view image in full size
   Snowpiercer (2013)

   But by this logic, would Inside (2021), Moonlight (2016), and
   Snowpiercer (2013) — all films directed by men — not be considered the
   female gaze as well? Are they not thoughtful pieces? Are they not free
   of hypersexualized women with the personality of a cardboard box?

   In my opinion, no.

   The male gaze is rooted in stereotypes. It is not saying “all men make
   films that objectify women,” it is saying “enough men make films like
   this that it has become a pattern worthy of disruption.”

   And remember, this is about more than just costumes and characters. Of
   the top 100 grossing films of 2019, only 10% were directed by women,
   only 19% were written by women, and most of those women were white.

   Birds of Prey (2020) is an excellent example of the female gaze in
   action, especially when juxtaposed with its predecessor Suicide Squad.

   In Suicide Squad, antihero Harley Quinn is, like her infamous baseball
   bat, a prop. She is present to be ogled by men on and off-screen, and
--
   Perhaps a more realistic approach is to be willing to critique said
   content, hold its creators accountable, and support women in film — all
   women.
   Film
   The Male Gaze
   Feminism
   Marvel
   Movies

