          + Work for CNN

   Health Wellness 13 min read

After years of progress on gender, the male gaze is back

   Text by Madeline Holcombe and photo illustrations by Jason Lancaster
   Updated Oct 11, 2025, 9:14 AM ET Published Oct 11, 2025, 6:00 AM ET
   Updated Oct 11, 2025, 9:14 AM ET
   PUBLISHED Oct 11, 2025, 6:00 AM ET

   The male gaze came roaring back this summer, with an advertisement
   featuring Sydney Sweeney.
   The male gaze came roaring back this summer, with an advertisement
   featuring Sydney Sweeney.
   Photo Illustration by Jason Lancaster/CNN/Getty Images

   (BUTTON) Movies (BUTTON) Social media (BUTTON) People in entertainment
--

   How had these discarded ideas made their way back into circulation?
   Didn’t we all agree we were through with them?

   The culprit, I have learned, is the male gaze. It was always there, but
   now it has stepped back into the spotlight.
   Flapper fashion of the 1920s transitions to accentuated waists and
   feminine shapes of the ’30s.
   Flapper fashion of the 1920s transitions to accentuated waists and
--
   Photo Illustration by Jason Lancaster/CNN/Getty Images

Back to the male perspective

   The male gaze came roaring back this summer.

   American Eagle –– whose partner brand Aerie has been known for
   marketing underwear to women with imagery that celebrated stretch
   marks, cellulite and a range of body sizes — ran a controversial ad
--
   career move made even more viral by her bashing the wives and
   girlfriends of her sexual partners and suggesting men cheating is the
   fault of the women who aren’t available enough for sex.

   “Most typically, the male gaze is about representing women in media
   solely to satisfy heterosexual men,” said Dr. Linda Tuncay Zayer,
   professor of marketing and John F. Smith, Jr. Chair in Business
   Administration at the Quinlan School of Business at Loyola University
   Chicago.
--
In the eye of the beholder

   If you are observing women in movies, TV, fashion, social media and
   marketing and they don’t feel as fully materialized as their male
   counterparts, that is the male gaze.

   “The woman’s value is reduced in so far as existing for pleasure or
   basically an object,” Zayer said.

--
   before collapsing helplessly in the hero’s arms. And a social media
   star making a recipe while all dolled up and explaining her steps in a
   soft, sultry voice.

   The male gaze has always been around — art in the eye of the male
   beholder — but the term came into modern existence as a feminist theory
   coined by film critic Laura Mulvey in 1975. Although it started as a
   lens through which to view film, Mulvey specifically calling out
   Marilyn Monroe’s appearance in “The River of No Return” and movie
--
   cultural perspectives that keep men’s stories, experiences and interest
   as the societal priority and treat women as objects rather than active
   participants.

   The male gaze includes stories told about women in relation to a male
   character (think wife, daughter, victim) and media in which the camera
   angles and visual storytelling make the audience feel like they are
   viewing the women from a heterosexual male’s perspective, Zayer added.

   It may even be hard to recognize when media is coming from the male
   gaze because it is so pervasive, Zayer said. “We’re kind of a goldfish
   in the water where this is part of our culture,” she added.

   As you try to identify it, Zayer stresses the male gaze is not just
   about the way something looks — it’s about power. And media matters.

   Characters in TV and film have encouraged women to move into science,
   technology, engineering and math careers, research has shown. When
--

   “What happens in the world of make believe has real world impact,” she
   added.

What about the female gaze?

   The dominance of the male gaze hasn’t gone unchecked. Storytellers have
   been presenting alternative ways of viewing women for many years.

   Often when women are shown as sexy or sexual on screen, it is a
   performance for men and doesn’t include their own search for pleasure
   or complex storylines. On the other hand, there is the female gaze,
   with shows and movies like “Bridgerton” and “Portrait of a Lady on
   Fire” demonstrating how women can be sexual without being objectified.

   Mothers and daughters weren’t accessories to the men in their lives
--
   Left to right: Anne Hathaway in "The Idea of You," author Miranda July,
   and Nicola Coughlan in "Bridgerton."
   Prime/Getty Images/Netflix

   Opinion: The female gaze is taking over page and screen, and it is hot

   One of the most successful comedies of 2011 — and all time — is a film
   about an ensemble of women of different races, family structures and
   body types getting together in “Bridesmaids.” It’s hard to tell Maya
   Rudolph, Kristen Wiig and Melissa McCarthy that women aren’t funny— a
   trope that falls outside the narrow confines of the male gaze.

   And beloved shows like the original “Star Trek” have appealed to
   audiences of all kinds while showing female characters and people of
   color in complex storylines and positions of power. NASA even gives
   credit to actor Nichelle Nichols (who played Lt. Nyota Uhura in the
   series that aired from 1966 to 1969) for working with the agency to
   help diversify its talent pool.

   Some have called this kind of storytelling the female gaze. And while
   there have been powerful works of art and media with women at their
   center, they are still the exception and not the rule.

   Take the Bechdel test, coined by cartoonist and graphic novelist Alison
   Bechdel in a comic strip. To pass it, a book, film or show must have at
   least two women; they must talk to each other, and about something
   other than a man. Failing the test is a good sign that media is part of
   the male gaze –– and you can probably think of plenty that can’t check
   any of those boxes.
   “We can do it” fashion of the ’40s turns to the ’50s housewife.
   “We can do it” fashion of the ’40s turns to the ’50s housewife.
   Photo Illustration by Jason Lancaster/CNN/Getty Images
--
The pendulum swings back and forth

   Throughout history, when the pendulum swings one way, it tends to
   eventually swing back the other way. The same is true culturally.
   Although the male gaze has always been part of most cultures, there
   have been efforts to diversify perspectives, tell more stories and
   bring women into more positions of power.

   Decades of fighting for women’s suffrage in the United States found
--
   social media.

Using sexuality to sell

   The male gaze remains a profitable marketing tool. Underlying many
   advertisements is the message that if only a woman could be more
   beautiful and appealing to men, they can find love, acceptance and a
   better version of their lives — all for the low, low price of these
   weight loss gummies or that workout program, these seductive
--
   often express loyalty to brands who give them that content, Zayer said.

   “The business of it makes sense,” she said.

When women sign on to the male gaze

   Although the concept of the male gaze originally came from film and has
   expanded to television, art and literature, it is deeply connected to
   finance, Joyrich said.

   When the prevailing perspective in stories, art and advertising is
   White and male, then those who don’t align with those identities have
   less power, she said. And no one is immune from the societies and
   cultures in which they live.

   Women sometimes turn the male gaze on one another. It happens when they
   objectify themselves, promote traditional gender roles as the ideal way
   of living and enforce beauty standards for others, Sredl said.[DEL:
   :DEL]

   Sometimes women think it is empowering to utilize the male gaze, or to
   make a living in a society that profits financially off their
   exploitation, and others do it to feel in control, Joyrich added. “I
   might as well sell my own sexuality before you do,” she said.

   But still, it’s large corporations that profit most, Joyrich said.

The dominant perspective most of the time

   There may be ebbs and flows in how pervasive the male gaze is, but it
   has never really gone away, Joyrich said.

   Women have made strides when it comes to representation in media — take
   Reese Witherspoon’s production company championing women-led stories
--
   There are real-life implications, however, when spreading a message
   that women should only strive to please men and men should only see the
   women in their lives in one way.

   Often the traditional beauty standards put forward by the male gaze are
   unrealistic. They favor thin bodies that few people can maintain in a
   healthy way, Zayer said. And usually, the standards prioritize
   Whiteness, Joyrich added. Women who don’t naturally meet those ideals
   are left struggling to win a competition stacked against them.
--
   Both men and women should feel empowered to do what is right for
   themselves, whether that’s climb the corporate ladder or stay at home
   as a parent, Zayer said.

   The male gaze also limits men when it encourages viewing women as
   objects rather than complex, multidimensional human beings, Zayer said.

   In a world where male loneliness is a crisis, the isolation problem
   gets even worse when the culture tells men that women (about half the
