
   The term ocular motility refers to the study of the twelve extraocular
   muscles and their impact on eye movement. Each eye has six muscles,
   four rectus and two oblique, which, when functioning properly, allow
   the eyes to work together in a wide range of gaze.

                          Muscles of the Right Eye

   Patients are usually tested for eye position and movement during a
   routine eye examination. To observe the action of all twelve muscles,
   the patient is asked to look in the 9 diagnostic positions of gaze. The
   patient follows a target to various points of gaze while the physician
   closely monitors their eye movements. Any noted limitation or
   misalignment of the eyes could indicate muscle weakness or paralysis
   and warrant further investigation.

                       9 Diagnostic Positions of Gaze



   Normal alignment on forward gaze

                          Deviation on upward gaze

   Ocular motility photographs may be requested in order to document any
   improper muscle action. These images can be used to reinforce the
   physician's clinical impression, for medical-legal reasons or as a
--

                            Grid Focusing Screen

   Once the subject is in focus and properly positioned in the frame,
   direct the patient to look in the 9 diagnostic gazes and photograph
   each one. Having a target for the patient to fixate on will help them
   focus their gaze in the proper direction. The nine gazes are: straight
   ahead, left, right, straight up, up and to the left, up and to the
   right, straight down, down and to the left, down and to the right. To
   get an unobstructed view of the eyes in the downgaze positions, have
   the patient or better yet, a helper, elevate the patient's upper lids.

   Uniform picture quality is very important, so always be aware of
   composition throughout the series. Patient head movement should be kept
--
   children, having them sit on their parents lap may be helpful. Movement
   can be minimized by having the parent gently hold the child's head in
   the forward position.

                              9 Gaze Composite

   Once a 9 gaze series is completed, a composite image showing all nine
   views is often requested. How you create this image depends on the
   equipment at your disposal.

   Since digital photography is by far the most popular method of image
   capture, any of the popular image management software, such as Adobe
   Photoshop, can create a nine gaze composite. While these programs will
   differ slightly in the step by step process, creating a digital
   composite is usually a ‘copy and paste' process. Some programs will
   allow you to create a ‘template' that can be opened every time you need
   to create the composite image. If you are use a digital retinal imaging
--

   With a film based camera, the easiest way to produce a composite image
   is to use negative film for the original photography, then
   re-photographing the prints. After photographing the 9 diagnostic
   gazes, have the lab make 2" x 3" prints from the negatives. The prints
   can then be placed in their proper order into a nine sectioned, plastic
   file page. Then simply make a photographic copy of the entire page with
   a digital camera and you will have created a composite image.

