   The New Yorker

   Second Read

The Invention of “the Male Gaze”

   In 1973, the film theorist Laura Mulvey used concepts from
   psychoanalysis to forge a feminist polemic and a lasting shorthand for
   gender dynamics onscreen.
--
   there? Where does it exist within the space of the story? And if it’s
   there to court our appreciation, who does it think we are?

   Men, possibly. Often, these days, we confront such questions by
   invoking the concept of “the male gaze.” The term was popularized,
   fifty years ago, by the British film theorist Laura Mulvey, who wrote,
   in a 1973 essay called “Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema,” of how
   the “male gaze projects its fantasy onto the female figure, which is
   styled accordingly.” Mulvey sought to break down the mechanics of
   looking to expose how cinematic conventions reinforce patriarchal
   fantasy, a task that she believed “called out for the vocabulary and
   the concepts of psychoanalysis.” At the time, the work of the
   mid-century French psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan was de rigueur in cinema
   studies. His concept of the gaze posited that the act of looking was
   fundamental to the development of one’s identity. An infant, during
   what Lacan calls the “mirror stage,” achieves self-mastery by communing
   with his or her own reflection; in the cinema, the theory went,
   something similar happened as spectators formed a sense of
--

   Yet Mulvey argued that cinema, in fact, reconciles this tension, by
   consolidating both kinds of looking within the consuming of a
   particular kind of fantasy image. In a darkened theatre, our compulsory
   gaze is in reflexive sympathy with the camera’s interests and our
   pleasure stirred by the human forms onscreen, some of whom seem posed
   for our perusal. Those figures, Mulvey noticed, are often female; like
   that ass in “Sin City,” they are there not to participate in the
   narrative so much as to adorn it. This cinematic world does not operate
--
   between passive femininity and active masculinity—the
   “to-be-looked-at-ness eroticism” of, say, Marlene Dietrich’s famous
   legs in the 1930 film “Morocco” versus the heroic wanderlust of her
   co-star, Gary Cooper. As John Berger wrote in his own analysis of the
   masculine gaze in visual art, from the 1972 book “Ways of Seeing”
   (adapted from the BBC series of the same name), “One might simplify
   this by saying: men act and women appear.” Sometimes, Mulvey later
   wrote, “the female spectator may feel so out of key with the pleasure
   on offer, with its ‘masculinisation’, that the spell of fascination is
--
   much as with the technological process by which gender dynamics are
   asserted onscreen and alchemized through the pleasure of spectators.
   The way bodies are framed, and the way the camera moves, teaches us to
   look at women the way that patriarchy already does. Over time, Mulvey’s
   theory of the male gaze became an obligatory citation for works of
   feminist film criticism. As the critics Janet Bergstrom and Mary Ann
   Doane put it, any scholar who came afterward “felt compelled to situate
   herself in relation.” It also became a favorite shorthand for works of
   mainstream criticism seeking to critique how gender plays out in film
   and television. (According to one reviewer, Sam Levinson’s tepidly
   provocative new HBO series “The Idol,” about a pop star who bares all,
   “screams the male gaze.”) Various films in recent years, such as Steven
   Soderbergh’s male-stripper trilogy “Magic Mike” and Céline Sciamma’s
   lesbian period piece “Portrait of a Lady on Fire,” have prompted a
   parallel preoccupation with “the female gaze,” broadly defined as a
   humane courting of the pleasure of women viewers. But, as other critics
   have pointed out, when applied too broadly that term can obscure rather
   than illuminate. The New Yorker’s Emily Nussbaum wrote in a review of
   the 2016 Amazon series “I Love Dick,” adapted from Chris Kraus’s
   experimental feminist novel, that the term “female gaze” had become
   “blunt” from overuse, “particularly with its essentialist hint that
   women share one eye: a vision that is circular, mucky, menstrual,
   intimate, wise.” Contrary to Mulvey’s approach, uses of the “gaze”
   today—be it the male gaze, the white gaze, the straight gaze, and so
   forth—seem more invested in matters of identity than in the project of
   aesthetic analysis. They want to name who is doing the looking rather
   than how. (No wonder Cate Blanchett, in an interview for the 2015 live
   adaptation of “Cinderella,” misheard a question about the “Disney
   villain gaze” as “Disney villian gays.”)

   What too often gets elided from current gaze talk is the possibility of
   looking as an act of ambivalence. As Frantz Fanon wrote in “Black Skin,
   White Masks,” his psychoanalytic study of colonialism, even the
   oppressor’s gaze can be a site of uncertainty; no one’s viewpoint—or
   projection—is entirely secure. In a 1989 critique of mainstream film
   criticism, bell hooks turned her attention to the previously ignored
   experience of the Black female spectator. Alienated by the exclusionary
   and racist fantasies of Hollywood cinema, Black women developed their
   own way of looking, in which a critical awareness of stereotypes
   preëmpted any straightforward identification with the mammies or tragic
   mulattas onscreen. One did not acquire this “oppositional gaze,” as
   hooks called it, by virtue of being Black and female; rather, one
   cultivated it through the tug and pull of resisting dominant ways of
   looking. Mulvey, in that sense, like other film theorists of the time,
   had made too much of the idea that cinematic images could impose a
   point of view.

   In the introduction to a 1989 collection of her essays, “Visual and
   Other Pleasures,” Mulvey wrote that her essay on the male gaze had
   erupted from the ecstatic feminist thinking of its time. Feminists of
   the seventies understood the political utility of a polemic. Mulvey, in
   that spirit, had forfeited a degree of nuance, she noted; any
   revisitation of her essay should consider it part of the “historical
   moment” rather than as a concept made to last. But Mulvey’s essay also
   had a forward-looking bent that gets overlooked when present-day
   critics invoke the “male gaze” as a cudgel. A lifelong cinephile and a
   filmmaker herself, Mulvey saw in the emerging independent filmmaking of
   the sixties and seventies an opportunity for cinema to detach itself
   from the patriarchal conventions and monied priorities of Hollywood.
   Invoking directors of the avant-garde including Hollis Frampton and
--

   What remains invigorating about Mulvey’s essay, above all, is its
   interest in the capacity of psychoanalysis to teach us new ways of
   looking. Film theorists who return to Lacan have pointed out that even
   he did not treat the gaze as a site of clear-cut self-knowledge. The
   film professor Todd McGowan, in a 2003 article called “Looking for the
   Gaze,” revisited Lacan’s reading of the Hans Holbein the Younger
   painting “The Ambassadors,” in “The Seminar Book XI: The Four
   Fundamental Concepts of Psychoanalysis.” The large-scale work shows two
   men, one richly garbed and another in religious dress, leaned against a
   table stuffed with objects. A memento mori in the lower third of the
--
   art object. When we look, Lacan wrote, “something slips, passes, is
   transmitted, from stage to stage, and is always to some degree eluded
   in it.”

   In a book published this spring, “A Black Gaze,” Tina M. Campt, a Black
   feminist theorist of visual culture at Princeton, picks up that strain
   in Lacan’s thinking. The gaze as she presents it is not another
   decisive site of power; it is not a diagnosis or a settled definition.
   (“My choice of the indefinite article is intentional,” she writes, of
   the book’s title.) She is interested, rather, in how different art
   works—she cites, for instance, Arthur Jafa’s quotidian video
--
   with Nance’s preliminary sketch or his friend’s final feedback? Each
   scene upends viewers’ positions and redoubles our sense of doubt.
   Rather than making us feel known, the sketch makes us feel ashamed of
   our self-assurance. It is not an unpleasurable experience. As we can
   glean from Lacan, sometimes it is useful to feel the gaze turned back
   at you. ♦

New Yorker Favorites

