
     * Actors + Performers
     * Creators

The Male Gaze: A Full Guide to Its Effect on Art and Society

   By Alicia Lutes | August 14, 2024
   Article Image
   Photo Source: “Birds of Prey” Credit: Claudette Barius

   You’ve no doubt heard of the “male gaze”—it has, after all, been the
   backbone of art and entertainment since man first put pen or paint to
   paper. Conversation around the concept has had a particular resurgence
   as modern filmmakers aim to subvert long-held tropes. But what is it,
   exactly? And how can we work against its grip on Hollywood and beyond?
   Read on.

What is the male gaze?

   In the simplest of terms, it is the male point of view as shown
   onscreen. More specifically, it’s the way male storytellers write and
   frame women to service the desires and worldview of men. The male gaze
   has existed in the art world for centuries, but the term itself was
   coined by British film theorist Laura Mulvey in a 1973 essay, “Visual
   Pleasure and Narrative Cinema.” In it, she notes that the “male gaze
   projects its fantasy onto the female figure, which is styled
   accordingly.”

   To understand the concept, you must first acknowledge the context: We
--
   percentage of women in speaking roles was 35% (down from 37% in 2022),
   and the percentage of movies with female protagonists was 28% (down
   from 33% in 2022).

What does the male gaze look like?

   The male gaze often reduces women to props and set dressing—objects of
   wish fulfillment and lust, no matter their status. Hallmarks include
   close-ups on body parts, framing that accentuates sexuality outside the
   proper context, and slow-motion camera movements (running, bouncing,
   etc.). A 2018 study conducted by Plan International and the Geena Davis
--
   versus 7% for male characters). They are also nearly twice as likely to
   appear partially nude (15% versus 8%) and completely nude (2% versus
   0.5%).

   Watch the particularly male gaze-y choices made throughout this
   conversation scene in Michael Bay’s “Transformers” (2007).

   IFRAME: https://www.youtube.com/embed/f6L3Ef1JCC8

   The male gaze isn’t always overtly sexual (just often!). It also comes
   in the form of particularly helpless or passive female characters, as
   evidenced by centuries of the damsel in distress trope. It also
   sometimes looks like a manic pixie dream girl who exists solely to
   further a tragic man’s arc. And it can just mean a male creator
--
   throughout the entirety of Colin Trevorrow’s “Jurassic World” (2015).

   IFRAME: https://www.youtube.com/embed/RF7gE8Iize0

How the male gaze impacts storytelling—and the world

   The male gaze has had a huge impact on the world and storytelling, with
   both influencing the other in equal measure. Its ubiquitousness
   conditions women to adhere to a patriarchal conception of how to look
   and act. Similarly, it reaffirms to men that this is how women should
   be viewed and treated.
--
   “A woman is always accompanied, except when quite alone, and perhaps
   even then, by her own image of herself. While she is walking across a
   room or weeping at the death of her father, she cannot avoid
   envisioning herself walking or weeping,” said influential critic John
   Berger, speaking on the effect of the male gaze in art. “From earliest
   childhood she is taught and persuaded to survey herself continually.
   She has to survey everything she is and everything she does, because
   how she appears to others—and particularly how she appears to men—is of
   crucial importance for what is normally thought of as the success of
--
   that “female characters in 2023 creative work were portrayed as having
   less independence than male characters, particularly in regards to
   occupation and work status.”

How to subvert the male gaze

   In short: Watch more film and television made by and for women! There
   are plenty of ways to get yourself acquainted with the female gaze.
   Directors like Agnès Varda and Céline Sciamma have done brilliant work
   that upends the typical narratives afforded women. Films like Varda’s
   “Cléo From 5 to 7” (1962) and “Lions Love (...and Lies)” (1969), or
   Sciamma’s “Girlhood” (2014), “Portrait of a Lady on Fire” (2019), and
   “Petite Maman” (2021) put the female gaze front and center in a way
   that subverts our more traditional (and therefore traditionally male)
   visual points of view. The more you watch and study, the more you will
   understand the difference.

   “The voice of the male gaze is so loud, it can send a small
   representative to live inside your brain, to tell you what you should
   do, and how you should value yourself, and what actions aren’t worth
   causing a fuss over,” actor Betty Gilpin (“Glow,” “Mrs. Davis”) told
   Harper’s Bazaar. “I think that it’s up to us to kill that
