   (BUTTON) Live
   (BUTTON) Weather
   (BUTTON) Newsletters

Why meeting another’s gaze is so powerful

   8 January 2019
   (BUTTON) Share (BUTTON) Save
   Christian JarrettFeatures correspondent
--
   romantic cinema. But the complex, unconscious reactions that take place
   are anything but make believe.

   You’ve doubtless had the experience when, across a noisy, crowded room,
   you lock gazes with another person. It’s almost like a scene out of the
   movies – the rest of the world fades to grey while you and that other
   soul are momentarily connected in the mutual knowledge that they are
   looking at you and you at them.

--

   For instance, a recurring finding is that gazing eyes grab and hold our
   attention, making us less aware of what else is going on around us
   (that ‘fading to grey’ that I mentioned earlier). Also, meeting
   someone’s gaze almost immediately engages a raft of brain processes, as
   we make sense of the fact that we are dealing with the mind of another
   person who is currently looking at us. In consequence, we become more
   conscious of that other person’s agency, that they have a mind and
   perspective of their own – and, in turn, this makes us more
   self-conscious.

   You may have noticed these effects particularly strongly if you’ve ever
   held the intense gaze of a monkey or ape at a zoo: it is almost
   impossible not to be overcome by the profound sensation that they are a
   conscious being judging and scrutinising you. In fact, even looking at
   a portrait painting that appears to be making eye contact has been
   shown to trigger a swathe of brain activity related to social cognition
--
   contact with them. The researchers think this effect occurred because
   eye contact – even with a stranger in a video – is so intense that it
   drains our cognitive reserves.

   Similar research has found that meeting the direct gaze of another also
   interferes with our working memory (our ability to hold and use
   information in mind over short periods of time), our imagination, and
   our mental control, in the sense of our ability to suppress irrelevant
   information. You may have experienced these effects first hand, perhaps
--
   stare without letting go can come across as creepy

   As well as sending our brains into social overdrive, research also
   shows that eye contact shapes our perception of the other person who
   meets our gaze. For instance, we generally perceive people who make
   more eye contact to be more intelligent, more conscientious and sincere
   (in Western cultures, at least), and we become more inclined to believe
   what they say.

   Of course, too much eye contact can also make us uncomfortable – and
   people who stare without letting go can come across as creepy. In one
   study conducted at a science museum, psychologists recently tried to
   establish the preferred length of eye contact. They concluded that, on
   average, it is three seconds long (and no one preferred gazes that
   lasted longer than nine seconds).
   [grey-placeholder.png] Getty Images The drama of realising we are the
   object of another mind is highly distracting (Credit: Getty Images)
   Getty Images
   The drama of realising we are the object of another mind is highly
   distracting (Credit: Getty Images)

   Another documented effect of mutual gaze may help explain why that
   moment of eye contact across a room can sometimes feel so compelling. A
   recent study found that mutual gaze leads to a kind of partial melding
   of the self and other: we rate strangers with whom we’ve made eye
   contact as more similar to us, in terms of their personality and
   appearance. Perhaps, in the right context, when everyone else is busy
   talking to other people, this effect adds to the sense that you and the
   person looking back at you are sharing a special moment.

   The chemistry of eye contact doesn’t end there. Should you choose to
   move closer, you and your gaze partner will find that eye contact also
   joins you to each other in another way, in a process known as “pupil
   mimicry” or “pupil contagion” – this describes how your pupils and the
   other person’s dilate and constrict in synchrony. This has been
   interpreted as a form of subconscious social mimicry, a kind of ocular
--
   When you look another person in the eye, then, just think: it is
   perhaps the closest you will come to ‘touching brains’ – or touching
   souls if you like to be more poetic about these things. Given this
   intense intimacy, perhaps it is little wonder that if you dim the
   lights and hold the gaze of another person for 10 minutes non-stop, you
   will find strange things start to happen, stranger perhaps than you’ve
   ever experienced before.

   --
