     * How to perform Saccadometry
     * How to perform the Active Head Rotation test
     * How to perform the Ocular Counter Roll (OCR) test
     * How to use the Research Module
     * How to perform the Gaze Stabilization Test (GST)
     * How to perform Cervical Gaze testing
     * How to perform the Functional Vision Head Impulse Test (fvHIT™)
     * How to use keyboard shortcuts in VisualEyes™
     * How to perform Pupillometry
     * How to perform Self-Paced Saccades
     * How to perform the Smooth Pursuit Neck Torsion (SPNT) test
     * How to set up and troubleshoot monitors for oculomotor and optotype
       tests

How to perform the Gaze test

     * Balance

     VisualEyes™
--
   15 February 2022
   10 mins
   Reading

What is the gaze test?

   The gaze test measures the patient’s ability to maintain a steady gaze
   on an object at various angles without the eye generating extraneous
   movements (i.e. square wave jerks or nystagmus). The inability to
   maintain a steady gaze is an indication of either a central or
   peripheral vestibular system lesion. Gaze positions tested are: center
   (straight ahead), gaze left, gaze right, gaze up and gaze down.


Patient instructions

   “You will see a green dot on the screen. Simply look at the dot. If the
   dot moves, follow it with your eyes only. Try not to move your head.”


Normal gaze results

   A patient with normal gaze ability will produce a tracing that is
   virtually a straight line once the eyes are fixated on the target. The
   right eye is represented by the red line and the left eye by the blue
   line. If nystagmus is present it will be identified by triangles on the
   eye position graph to represent each detected nystagmus beat. The
--
   exceeds the threshold value of 6⁰/sec, the bar graph will be shaded
   grey and a red diamond will appear near the bar graph to indicate an
   out of threshold response.

   Gaze results overview, including gaze center, gaze right 30 degrees,
   gaze down 20 degrees, gaze left 30 degrees, and gaze up 20 degrees. For
   all subtests, the blue curve for eye position follows the yellow curve
   for target position almost perfectly.

   Gaze test showing normal response for all gaze angles (center, left,
   right, up and down)


Abnormal gaze results

   An “abnormal” gaze tracing might present itself in several ways. A
   patient may present with square wave jerks, nystagmus, or gaze decay.
   Below are examples of abnormal tracings:

   Gaze results overview, including gaze center, gaze right 30 degrees,
   gaze down 20 degrees, gaze left 30 degrees, and gaze up 20 degrees. For
   gaze right and left 30 degrees, horizontal left, the blue curve for eye
   position is jagged, indicating nystagmus. For right 30 degrees, the
   average slow phase velocity of the nystagmus is 6. For left 30 degrees,
   the average slow phase velocity of the nystagmus is 7. The nystagmus
   peaks are marked with a blue triangle, and the failed subtests are
   flagged with a red diamond.

   Gaze test showing bilateral gaze-evoked nystagmus

   Gaze results overview for gaze down 20 degrees. For vertical left, the
   blue curve for eye position is jagged, indicating nystagmus. The
   average slow phase velocity of the nystagmus is 6. The nystagmus peaks
   are marked with a blue triangle, and the subtest is flagged with a red
   diamond.

   Gaze test showing down-beating nystagmus on gaze down 20⁰


Conclusion

   Gaze testing is the ONLY test of the four ocular tests in which an
   “abnormal” result could be generated either from the peripheral
   vestibular system or from the central vestibular system. For a complete
   discussion of differential diagnosis using the gaze test, refer to:

   Jacobson, GP, and Shepard, NT. Balance Functional Assessment and
   Management, 2nd Ed. San Diego; Plural Publishing, 2015

