   #Documentary Animation Discourse » Feed Documentary Animation Discourse
   » Comments Feed Documentary Animation Discourse » The Gaze:
   Psychoanalysis, Ideology, and Representation Comments Feed alternate
   alternate Documentary Animation Discourse WordPress.com

   Skip to content
--
     * Home
     * About
     * Contact

The Gaze: Psychoanalysis, Ideology, and Representation

   My primary interest in writing about cinematic theories of the Gaze is
   to establish how various forms of looking are manifesting in my own
   animated documentary practice. While traditionally this discourse is
   organised around spectatorship and not practice, I aim to relate the
   various theories of the cinematic gaze to the actions, decisions and
   assumptions required for filmmaking in order to influence spectators.

   My research explores the representation of autistic participants in
   animated documentaries that I create. Despite not being autistic I am
   neurodivergent in various ways and have developed a strong allegiance
   to the neurodiversity paradigm of understanding psychological and
   neurological forms of difference. I intend to investigate how the
   theoretical Gaze may be useful for understanding how my position and
   ideology manifest in film, how audiences may be interpolated into these
   perspectives and to what extent I have control over this process.

   I am equally interested in what Gaze theory means for animation; a
   medium in which the filmmaker utterly controls how the characters
   appear, behave and interact; a medium with no physical constraints on
   the way the filmmaker orchestrates and filters reality through mimesis,
   stylisation and invention. There is a limitless potential for how I
--
   Through this frame by frame control of each aspect of the image,
   animation has the potential to be a powerful vehicle for propaganda as
   well as unconscious projection.  However, it is beyond the remit of
   this article to fully expound the intersection of animation,
   documentary, and psychoanalysis. First, I must explore how the Gaze has
   been used in film theory and evaluate its relevance to my animated
   documentary practice.

   Origins

   Within film theory, conceptions of the gaze were established in the
   1970’s by psychoanalytic film theorists, Jean-Louis Baudry, Raymond
   Bellour, and Christian Metz, who related the experienced of cinema
   viewing to Lacan’s theorisation of the Mirror stage, an illusory
   encounter that starts when the child first sees themselves in the
--
   were left to either identify with the passivity of the female
   supporting roles or they could temporarily identify with the activity
   of the male character. In other words, women were given no other option
   but to be interpellated within the ideological system of patriarchy.
   Mulvey described the Male Gaze to be the phenomenon of expression and
   interpolation of patriarchal ideology, through this three-way matrix of
   cinematic looking. She relied on Lacan’s theory of the Mirror Stage to
   account for the diverse audience members misrecognising themselves
   within the cinematic experience (1975: 9-10).

   What I find useful to take from Mulvey is the formulation of Gaze
   showing the filmmaker already interpolated within ideologies. These
   ideological beliefs will manifest in the Symbolic organisation of the
   film, masked by Imaginary field of the visual. Both cinematic
   aesthetics and character performances reflect these ideologies, along
   with the “ideal” audience the director is attempting to appeal to. As
   such the process of looking, from the position of spectator,
   interpolates each spectator into the Symbolic order of patriarchy,
   whether they are male or not. The Gaze is, according to Mulvey, the
   invisible Symbolic order, present within the Imaginary dominated field
   of vision which organises the way the filmmaker chooses to create or
   capture images and directs the actors, while also emerging in the
   finished film as a captivating force that organises the audience’s
--
   artefact that reflects feminist ideologies. I have been told
   anecdotally that one does not need to be a woman to be a feminist, one
   simply needs to educate themselves to a sufficient extend that they
   raise their consciousness. Therefore, a man could theoretically execute
   the feminist Gaze if he had sufficiently internalised this ideology. I
   am intrigued firstly by the question of whether this level of
   ideological investment could be reached without lived experience of
   being a woman. Surely some aspects of this man’s unconscious activity
   will preserve internalised patriarchy. Secondly, and perhaps more
   importantly, if a man was able somehow to execute a feminist Gaze,
   would this be recognised as authentically feminist, i.e. how important
   is the alignment between identity (Ego) and ideology, to inspire
   authenticity?  I feel there is good justification for scepticism, as
   without lived experience of being a woman under patriarchy, a man would
--
   spectator, nor does it say much about the director other than the
   expectation that both are fully interpolated within the symbolic order
   of patriarchy.

   Oppositional Gaze

   Despite Mulvey’s success and good intentions, a wave of criticism
   developed around her conception of the Gaze, an example of which is
   Bell Hooks essay “The Oppositional Gaze” (2014). According to Hooks,
   Mulvey overlooked her own positioning within racist hierarchies when
   formulating a theory of spectatorship. Hooks contests that ‘many
   feminist film critics continue to structure their discourse as though
   it speaks about “women” when in actuality it speaks only about white
   women.’ (2014: 123). Hooks goes on to argue that Black men are
   interpolated within white notions of Male Gaze successfully as it gave
   them an opportunity to look at white women within the safety of the
   dark cinema space, an act that would have otherwise gone punished
   throughout American history (Ibid. 118). Where as ‘black female
   spectators have had to develop looking relations within a cinematic
   context that constructs our presence as absence, that denies the “body”
   of the black female so as to perpetuate white supremacy and with it a
   phallocentric spectatorship where the woman to be looked at and desired
   is “white.”’(Ibid.). Hooks calls this specific looking relation the
   Oppositional Gaze, a way of looking defined by involuntary critical
   distance. A certain enjoyment that comes from unpicking the racist and
   sexist ideology’s manifest in a film. ‘Watching movies from a feminist
   perspective, Mulvey arrived at that location of disaffection that is
   the starting point for many black women approaching cinema within the
--
   positions may be unintentionally tying into systems of oppression by
   omitting any acknowledgement of how the topic at hand, e.g. feminism,
   intersects with other powers structures, such as race.

   Hook’s Oppositional Gaze makes me mindful about how class, race,
   gender, sexuality, etc. [1] may intersect with my future participants’
   experience of autism, [2] may inform the way in which I represent my
   participants and [3] will inform a plurality of interpretive positions
   held by the various spectators of my work.
--
   subject position within society.

   From a Lacanian perspective, Hooks is arguing that Mulvey’s totalising
   conception of the Imaginary order, having the power to interpolate each
   and every spectator in to the Symbolic order hidden behind the Gaze,
   falls short of accounting for intersectional issues that position
   individuals differently in relation to the Symbolic order. Mulvey’s
   reading of psychoanalysis is unable to account for the distinct
   experience of the individual spectator.

   The Transgender Gaze

   Returning to the conception of cinema aesthetics manifesting ideology,
   Judith Halberstam, analyses the film Boys Don’t Cry (1999)in her
   article on the Transgender Gaze (2001). In this film, the fictional
   adaptation of a true story in which, a teenage trans man, Brandon,
   engages in a romantic relationship with a cis woman, Lana, before being
   brutally outed, raped and murdered by two cis men, Tom and John.

   Halberstam provided an example where multiple modes of looking – male,
   female and transgender –were each able to manifest in a single
   cinematic scene, demonstrating that cinematic Gaze can be a fluid
   construction and is not necessarily anchored by the identity of the
   director, in this instance Kimberly Peirce, who identifies as
   queergender (Dry 2019). Halberstam points out how the looking of each
   character is manifest in a scene where John and Tom force Brandon to
   expose his genitalia, while failing to make Lana look. ‘The brutality
   of their action here is clearly identified as a violent mode of
   looking, and the film identifies the male gaze with that form of
   knowledge which resides in the literal’ (2001: 295). In addition to the
   persecutory male look, the supportive female look of the lover is
   manifest as a point of view shot of her looking away. Finally,
   Brandon’s mode of looking is manifest as an exchange of looks between
   the protagonist’s naked sexed body, and the male gendered third person
   perspective of the same character. ‘In this shot/reverse-shot sequence
   between the castrated and the transgender Brandons, the transgender
   gaze is constituted as a look divided within itself, a point of view
   that comes from (at least) two places at the once one clothed and one
   naked.’ (Ibid.)

   Halberstam, compared to Mulvey and Hooks, places little emphasis on
--
   disability. This ideological stance is best summarised by the goals of
   the neurodiversity movement, and I can feel over the past 18 months how
   this ideology has shaped how I see autism, in addition to my own
   neurodivergent status. So, while it may be unreasonable to suggest that
   this film presents the Autistic Gaze, no matter how collaborative the
   film is, it is possible to suggest the film is a manifestation of the
   neurodiversity ideology and thus the Neurodivergent Gaze. It is still
   unclear to me if I would have been able to reach this ideological
   position without myself being neurodivergent.

   The Neurotypical Gaze

   Drawing on Autism was developed in opposition to what John-James
   Laidlow calls the “Neurotypical Gaze” (2020). Laidlow presents the
   perspectives of Mulvey, Hooks and Halberstam before exploring issues
   relating to the representation of autism. Specifically Laidlow
   addresses the association autism in the media has with young, white,
   maleness; the idea that trapped inside the autistic body is a
--
   the early psychoanalytic film theorists. Mulvey in particular set out
   an approach that connects the various acts of looking that take place
   in the production and reception of a film to the ideological structures
   that inform it. Laidlow also builds upon a more fluid conception of
   Gaze presented by Halberstam, as a mode of simulated looking, evocation
   or affective performance, each of which relates to ideology masked
   behind an Imaginary illusion. However, with each stage in this
   progression, the topics presented have more to do with matters of
   identity politics and representation than psychoanalysis.

   Contemporary theorisation of Lacan and the Gaze

   Mulvey and her predecessors’ conception of the Gaze argues for the
   spectator’s visual experience of cinema being dominated by a deceptive
   encounter with the Imaginary order, one of illusory identification,
   functioning to hide the Symbolic order, the architecture of ideology.
   The logical conclusion that Mulvey reached was to either maintain
--
   represent an abandonment of the psychoanalytic project: one must remain
   conscious and fortify the ego, while attempting to supress unconscious
   enjoyment. It strips psychoanalysis of its power to develop insight
   through examining unconscious activity (ibid.) and is another way for
   the ego to ‘avoid the Real of the Gaze’ (2007:14).

   McGowen explains this phenomenon by pointing out that early Lacanian
   film theorists had limited access to Lacan’s work beyond his Mirror
   Stage essay (2007: 4). Through research into Lacan’s full body of work
   McGowen illuminates that this conception of the Gaze is incomplete. It
   was developed by Lacan in a way that associates the Gaze closely with
   encroachments of the order of the Real, that which exists beyond
   symbolisation. ‘As a manifestation of the real rather than of the
   imaginary, the gaze marks a disturbance in the functioning of ideology
   rather than its expression’ (2007: 7).

   McGowen reorients the cinematic Gaze as the invisible but proactive
   distortion of the visible realm during the process of spectatorship.

   ‘The gaze exists in the way that the spectator’s perspective distorts
   the field of the visible, thereby indicating the spectator’s
   involvement in a scene from which the spectator seems excluded. It
   makes clear the effect of subjective activity on what the subject sees
   in the picture, revealing that the picture is not simply there to be
   seen and that seeing is not a neutral activity.’ (2007:7).

   From this contemporary reading of Lacan, the Gaze is a manifestation of
   the spectator’s loss of mastery over the image, however, rather than
   this relating to an Imaginary masking of the Symbolic, this lack of
   mastery is unconsciously connected to our own death and our inability
   to comprehend or control it, i.e. the Real (ibid.). Referring to
   Lacan’s expounding of the Gaze through Hans Holbein’s portrait The
   Ambassadors (1533), McGowen explains the Gaze as the distorted image of
   a skull within the painting. ‘Even when a manifestation of the gaze
   does not make death evident directly like this, it nonetheless carries
   the association insofar as the gaze itself marks the point in the image
   at which the subject is completely subjected to it. The gaze is the
   point at which the subject loses its subjective privilege and becomes
   wholly embodied in the object’ (2007:7).

   McGowen uses the subjective encounter with the image to show how this
   conception of the Gaze can account for the problems of different
   experiences of spectatorship and group identity raised by Hooks (ibid).
   The Gaze is the mechanism with which each image is perceived uniquely
   by each viewer, as this shows how the spectators’ unconscious desire is
   incorporated into how they look at and absorbed the film.

   The Gaze functions as the object cause of desire, (object petit a),
   i.e. the Gaze is the hidden object within our vision that ignites our
   desire, propelling us along the trajectory of the scopic drive, in
   search of this unattainable partial object.  Attempting to capture and
   contain this invisible blot in the screen’s content is a futile task
   but through its pursuit we may come close to experiencing the nature of
   our unconscious desires. Experiencing the tension between what we
   unconsciously desire and what we thought we wanted can erupt in a kind
   of traumatic enjoyment (Jouissance) (2007:15).

   The Gaze and our unconscious desire, by definition, elude our conscious
   comprehension, however, the experience of Jouissance is a visceral
   conscious phenomenon. As cinematic spectators, we can use moments of
   Jouissance to work back to detect the presence of the Gaze and it’s
   adjacent position to the Real. Through these traumatic glimpses, we can
   hypothesise structural inconsistencies within the Symbolic order where
   the Real is erupting, i.e. ideological weaknesses (ibid.).

--
   Lacanian film theorist by suggesting that psychoanalytic tools can not
   only illuminate hegemonic ideological domination but provide insights
   into how films can be used to erode it (2007: 15).

   The Gaze and Animated Documentary Practice

   What does a developed understanding of Lacan’s theory of the Gaze mean
   for me as a practitioner using animated documentary to represent
   autism? I see three possibilities:

   [1] I could continue to follow Mulvey’s example by employing Brechtian
--

   I have come to see Mulvey’s use of psychoanalytic tools as limited and
   perhaps even misleading, but non-the-less useful. They were a means to
   an end. And end that was thoroughly productive and emancipatory in its
   far-reaching influence. However, the concept of the Gaze has evolved in
   popular discourse far enough away from Lacan’s intentions, that it
   could be better replaced by the rhetoric of representation. That said,
   I am interested in continuing my theoretical engagement with Lacan. His
   insights will; [1] help me to analyse my own unconscious activity as a
--
   Complicated History. IndiWire Film [Online]. Available from:
   https://www.indiewire.com/2019/12/kimberly-peirce-interview-boys-dont-c
   ry-transgender-1202196536/ [Accessed 12 Dec 2019.

   HALBERSTAM, J. 2001. The transgender gaze in Boys Don’t
   Cry. Screen, 42, 294-298.

   HONESS ROE, A. 2011. Absence, excess and epistemological expansion:
   Towards a framework for the study of animated
   documentary. Animation, 6, 215-230.

   HOOKS, B. 2014. Black looks: Race and representation, Routledge.

   The Neurotypical Gaze, 2020. Directed by LAIDLOW, J.-J.

   MCCLOUD, S. 1993. Understanding comics: The invisible art. Northampton,
   Mass.

   MCGOWAN, T. 2007. Real Gaze, The: Film Theory after Lacan.

   METZ, C. 1982. Psychoanalysis and cinema: the imaginary
   signifer, London, Macmillan.

--
   Animated Documentary Director and Researcher View all posts by Alex
   Widdowson

   Unknown's avatar Author Alex WiddowsonPosted on
   26/02/202131/03/2023Categories TheoryTags Bell Hooks, gaze, imaginary,
   Lacan, laura mulvey, Psychoanalysis, Real, symbolic, Todd McGowen

3 thoughts on “The Gaze: Psychoanalysis, Ideology, and Representation”

    1.
   Autism Candles's avatar Autism Candles says:
       26/02/2021 at 6:33 pm
       Reblogged this on Autism Candles.
       LikeLiked by 1 person
       Reply
    2.
   Thegaze InWriting's avatar Thegaze Inpictures says:
       21/03/2021 at 1:44 pm
       Very interesting. I have been told by someone in the field that a
       good number of film directors have not been open to have public
       conversations with psychoanalysts about their creation. While this
--
     * Storytellers: Alex Widdowson
     * Open Workshop Residency
     * Drawing on Autism is available online
     * Science Gallery interview about Music & Clowns
     * The Gaze: Psychoanalysis, Ideology, and Representation
     * Agnieska Piotrowska’s PhD thesis Psychoanalysis and Ethics in
       documentary Film
     * Samantha Moore’s Doctoral Thesis ‘Out of Sight: Using animation to
       document perceptual brain states’
