   About
   Blog
   Contact

What is the ‘Gaze’ in Art?

   Jan 31
   Written By Adam Geczy

   Most art and film enthusiasts have heard of the ‘male gaze’ and the
   ‘colonial gaze’ and so on. These labels suggest that the gaze, way in
   which we approach looking, is not innocent. It is caught up with a
   whole set of presumptions and rules. These can boil down to what gender
   we are, where we come from, what we know and what we expect.

   One key thing to remember is that when it comes to art, gazing is
   largely about power. It's rude to stare at a person for a long while
   but we can stare at a work of art for as long as we want. But then we
   need to consider the role and nature of the artist in his or her gaze
   and how that effects of understanding of what is being represented.

Introduction

   To gaze is to look, specifically to look at which then means to look at
   in a particular way? How does that particular way affect what we see?
   When you’re hungry you’ll look at some delicious food in a different
   way from when you’re no longer hungry. But then, can an artist
   represent food in such a way that makes you feel hungry or remember
   when you were? These are nuances of the gaze, but there are also some
   delicate ideological concerns as well regarding race, nationality,
   gender etc.

   A brief look at the various key philosophical positions concerning the
   gaze show that we seldom if at all just look. For our own part we bring
   to the image as many assumptions and expectations as there are within
   the artwork itself.

   It is only by looking closely at this binary approach of imaging versus
--
   with an intricate combination of social mores; add to that subjective
   expectations and the vicissitudes of feeling.

   In the end the only answer is this: once the work of art ceases to
   excite responses, no longer elicits our gaze, once it loses its
   intrigue and the secret is uncovered, then as a object of contemplation
   it is exists only as something dried out, inertly expended like a
   filled-in crossword or a mastered computer game. The greatest works of
   art continually pose alternatives to our habits of image formation, or
--

Prisoners of the cave

   As introduced in the last chapter, Plato’s allegory of the cave makes
   us prisoners of the inadequacy of our gaze. The famous passage is in
   Book VII of the Republic:

     Behold! Human beings living in an underground den; here they have
     been from their childhood, and have their legs and necks chained so
--
   world, or Weltanschauung.

   And as I have suggested already, the new rights of the Enlightenment
   may have had salutary consequences for politics but the democracy of
   the gaze engendered not one right way of seeing, but many.

   The concept of external law gave over to internal consensus.

   This dilemma was already located by Kant who stressed the limitations
--
     correlative to ‘world’ as such and therefore ontologically
     constitutive: ‘world’, ‘reality’ as we know them, can appear only
     within the horizon of the subject’s finitude.

   When we relate this back to the gaze we deal with a certain lack which
   is both constitutive and the object of the gaze, which is the discovery
   of Lacan (1901-81) via the thought of Sartre (1905-80).

The gaze and the Other

   Kant’s philosophy may be relevant to the shift in the agency of the
   individual subject in relation to what he or she sees and knows, but
   Sartre was the first philosopher to explore the gaze per se as a
   function of the way we position ourselves in the world.

   What separates the gaze from just a look is that the gaze is active as
   opposed to passive and is performed with intent. In this dualism, there
   is the subject and the Other (capitalized in the English because unlike
   the French autrui, we do not have a special word for it).

   Our understanding of ourselves, the self-reflection that defines us as
   subjects, is reflected in others. However, we become aware of the
   Other’s presence when we are subjected to the gaze, thereby noticing
   that someone external to us has the power to discriminate similar to
   ours.

   The operable word here is power: in moments when we are startled, the
   presence of the gaze is the most pronounced.

   Sartre gives the example of the start we have when hearing a branch
   crack behind us: the feeling of vulnerability begins with being the
   recipient, not the agent, of the gaze. One of the most remarkable
   aspects of Sartre’s observation is that the gaze is not necessarily
   beholden to sight. Some suspenseful movies are built on this very
   principle, as are cultural critiques by minorities, as I will show in a
   moment.

   In one of his famous examples, Sartre relates the shame we feel when
   caught at spying through a keyhole that results in the gaze’s abrupt
   reversal. Only then, as on object of the gaze, does one become aware of
   the subjectivity that one had as holder of the gaze: ‘the person is
   present in consciousness inasmuch as he/she is the object of the
   Other.’

   The shame that this realization engenders is

     shame of oneself, being the recognition that I am well and am well
     and truly the object that the other gazes at and judges. I am only
     shamed by the loss of my freedom through becoming a given object.[…]
     And this ‘me’ that I am is only within the world where the Other has
     alienated me, […] [emphasis Sartre’s]

   Sartre had taken the first step by stating that we are made conscious
   of ourselves as subjects by another subject who makes us the object of
   the gaze, at which point Jacques Lacan replies that the only acceptable
   positioning of the gaze is therefore on the side of the Other.

Lacan, the gaze and lack

   Lacan agrees with Sartre’s insight that the gaze is not limited to
   sight, but he emphasizes that the look and the gaze are a split
   inherent in a drive that is manifested within ‘the scopic field’, an
   overarching zone of vision that is enlisted by desire or, in Lacan’s
   case lack, the cause of desire.

   The gaze is a look driven by need. Without lack, there can be no gaze.
   But Lacan goes even further: without lack there can be no
   consciousness, as the gaze is the ‘underside’ of consciousness. Lack of
   what? The phallus, but conceived of by Lacan in non-literal, mystical
   terms: not limited to the penis, the phallus is what defines the split
   between the sexes. For men it is what they have but is incomplete, for
   women it is what they do not have and what they want. Both desire it,
   but women want it more.

   I will return to this touchy point. In his discourse on the gaze Lacan
   sticks to the term object petit a, ‘a’ being the key term in the
   algorithm of the gaze, where ‘a’ is the essence of the gaze. It is what
   the gaze seeks—although we know now that seeking defines it—and what
   eternally eludes it.

   Hans Holbein the Younger. Jean de Dinteville and Georges de Selve ('The
   Ambassadors'). 1533. The National Gallery, London. Via Artsy

   In a wonderful ruse, Lacan calls upon Hans Holbein’s Ambassadors
   (1533), to illustrate the gaze itself as a process of eluding. He draws
   attention to the partly imperceptible thin diagonal form cutting across
   the foreground, a skull distorted by anamorphosis, a technique popular
   in Holbein’s time. Lacan makes the audacious suggestion that ‘Holbein
   makes visible for us here something that is simply the subject that is
   annihilated—annihilated in the form that is, strictly speaking, the
   imagined embodiment of the minus-phi  [(-f)] of castration’.

   If we are to see the phallus, to be in its presence, it can only be at
   the expense of its own extinction and the anullment of the gaze itself,
   hence the death of the one who sees; the stretched skull is the symbol
   or better, proxy, for a black hole. It is through this confrontation
   with ‘the anamorphic ghost’ that the gaze is then able to imagine
   itself ‘in its pulsate, dazzling and spread out function’.

   The painting locates precisely what Lacan says any picture is ‘a trap
   for the gaze’. Since pictures are not people, we can gaze at them,
   stare at them no less, without fear of reprisal, embarrassment—shame.

   In looking closely and at length at a picture we are not just looking
   at features of representation and description, rather our love of
   illusion is what both empties out the gaze, sucks it up, but as much
   momentarily satisfies it, makes it replete.

Feminist revisions: the male gaze

   The two major rebuttals to Lacan’s influential theses came with his
   former student, Luce Irigaray (b. 1930) and the film theorist, Laura
   Mulvey (b. 1941). Irigaray is one of the great feminist minds.
--
   the feminine through highlighting alternative values and avenues of
   thought.

   At roughly the same time as Irigaray, Laura Mulvey coined the term ‘the
   male gaze’ in her 1973 essay ‘ Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema’ to
   define the condition of the way in which women were viewed by postwar
   Hollywood cinema.

   Mulvey points to a ‘sexual imbalance, [wherein] pleasure in looking has
   been split between active/male and passive/female’. This dichotomy
   controls the narrative structure, reducing women to the status of
   vulnerability as always being the receptors of the gaze.

   Taking up the Lacanian assertion that the gaze is threatened by the
   very thing it seeks—since to found something only affirms what the gaze
   lacks—Mulvey states that the male gaze is subdivided into two seemingly
   incompatible stereotypes, for which the feminist shorthand is
   madonna/whore.

   The first is ‘fetisihistic scopophilia’ (scopophilia—‘love of looking’)
   in which women are beauteous items for visual delectation; the second,
   ‘voyeurism’, is the obverse, a sadism that ends in submission and
   defeat of its object/victim. More insidious still, as Mulvey argues,
   narrative film forces women viewers into ownership of the male gaze as
   well, since they see on behalf of the male protagonist who is supported
   by the ostensibly universal, but actually male eye of the camera.

   The artist who epitomizes the subjection of the female by the male gaze
   is Cindy Sherman, particularly in the work that launched her career,
   Untitled Film Stills (1977-80) which look like they have been extracted
   from classic film noir. Although staged, with the artist the
   centerpiece in different roles and costumes, one cannot help but be
--
   The one constant is the manner in which the nameless woman is steeped
   in vulnerability and sexual availability, in expectation of the male
   presence of which she is a mere symptom. With her mime of
   defenselessness and subordination, Sherman maneuvers her viewers
   squarely into the shoes of the male gaze.
   [i.TheGaze.png]

Historical precursors

   In light of Mulvey’s essay it is possible to say that the salient
   historical precursor to the male gaze is found in Baudelaire’s flâneur.
   Flâner is to amble or stroll, but as a result of his essay ‘The Painter
   of Modern Life’ (1863), Baudelaire (1821-67) all but takes theoretical
   ownership of the word.

--
   paraphernalia, odd people, motley scenes, singling out jarring
   juxtapositions that average city dwellers take for granted.

   But as feminists have shown, the Baudelairean flâneur is in confident
   possession of the male gaze, not to mention the male body. In
   nineteenth century cities women were not as free to wander the streets.
   Their susceptibility to the gaze was a regular indication of their
   limited freedoms in comparison to men.

   The Paris in Baudelaire’s thrall was the Paris that evolved as a result
   of the vast redevelopment at the hands of Napoleon III’s minister of
--
   outside—affected pictorial representation. It is an open question,
   however, as to whether this gendering of vision is essential or
   conditioned.

The Colonial subject, Orientalism and the Imperial Gaze

   When it came those to which the active Enlightenment subject trained
   his gaze, women were still treated as objects, as were non-Western
   peoples, who were the objects of knowledge.

   Evidently the modern, European subject believed himself to be the only
   viable one, and until others were converted to their way of thinking,
--
   shape, ugly and angular.

   Les Demoiselles d’Avignon. By Pablo Picasso. 1907. Via MoMA

   Circumstances of the presumptuous Imperial gaze may have shifted to a
   more self-critical conscience within the academy, but they have not for
   tourism or advertising which are ready to exploit anything with exotic
   appeal.

--

   Paul Gauguin, Where Do We Come From? What Are We? Where Are We Going?
   1897-8. Museum of Fine Arts, Boston.

The gaze, knowledge and power

   In the 1961 the philosopher Michel Foucault published the first of a
   series of influential books about how dominance, power and control is
   organized within Western society and thought since the seventeenth
--
   signs that erred from good health.

   In Discipline and Punish, Foucault focused on the prison reform of
   Jeremy Bentham, the inventor of the panopticon, an architectural device
   of surveillance that exposed prisoners to an omnipresent gaze.

   After the student riots in May 1968, Foucault’s questions about the
   substance of power and who wields it gained in momentum. ‘Who owns the
   gaze?’. The owner of power and knowledge.

   Yet power and knowledge can never be said to have their permanent
   source in one quality or thing. This means that whilst it is important
   to locate the gaze in order to determine the locus of power, the holder
   of the gaze is neither reducible to that power, nor is he or she ever
   in complete possession of it.

   Power and the gaze for Foucault is a configuration like a kaleidoscope:
   any discernible pattern is one among many; the pattern changes, along
   with the effect. ‘The question of power remains a total enigma’ says
   Foucault. Power is ‘not in the hands of those who govern’, and
   governance itself is a ‘fluid’ notion. ‘It is often difficult to say
--
   representation within a representation, stands outside of the picture,
   a mere shadow.

   Meanwhile it is the artist—working on a painting we cannot see or
   perhaps the painting we are now seeing, and who gazes directly at
   us—that has the greatest presence, signifying a possession of the gaze
   made possible through artistic invention. The sources of power in this
   picture find themselves continually displaced: for Velasquez the
   artist, because it is mediated through representing self-presentation
   (becoming both subject and object), and for the king and queen, through
--
   the German Hegelian Jürgen Habermas for whom power’s indeterminacy in
   Foucault’s thought only defers efforts to discourage solutions to
   power’s abuses.

The Postcolonial and Postfeminist gaze

   Once Foucault’s critique of the centralization of power in the modern
   age is applied to the Western male Orientalist, it raises a gamut of
   apposite yet thorny questions.

   Who has ownership of the gaze and what are its entitlements? If an
   indigenous society happens to approve of an outsider’s vision of them,
   artistic or otherwise, does their chorus of opinion make it right? Can
   a woman have the male gaze?

   If you resemble the peoples of one culture and grow up in another
   (Indians in England, Turks in Germany, Chinese in Australia, Koreans in
   the U.S.) does this give you a special advance on your access to the
--
   reassessment on a periodic basis. In stable countries, identity is the
   catchcry for artists and curators who fear the scourges of
   globalization.

   Whereas the Orientalist gaze of a superior us seeing an inferior them,
   there is now as much the case of a ‘me’ seeing my own for the
   delectation of a curious ‘them’. While many artists who identify with
   minorities make worthwhile statements of what it means to feel
   oppressed and subjected, just as many use parts of their background
--

   Nations under the weight of gratitude to international aid—for damage
   that imperialism has wrought in the first place—such as many in Africa
   can still be said to have what Homi Bhaba has called ‘the threatened
   return of the look’, a gaze that, while subjected, is still forcefully
   active as reproach.

   Karina Eileras develops this notion with reference to the images by
   Marc Garanger, photographer for the French army in 1960-2 at the time
--
   A photograph of an Algerian woman in a French regroupment village.
   1960. Marc Garanger. Via TIME

   Attentive analyses like hers are helpful in exposing the lack of
   neutrality of the image, and the way that the gaze can intercepted and
   deflected in a way that does not combat the West’s way of gazing,
   (which, so the theory goes, would only duplicate its negative
   power-play) but rather in a manner that comes at it from the back door.

   But speaking on behalf of the Western white male, can there be said to
   be a post-Orientalist gaze? This image, Affliction of the Protestant
   (2005), by Phillip George indicates that the question can be answered
   in the affirmative.

   Affliction of the Protestant. By Phillip George. 2005.
--
   surveillance. The title considers the Western ignorance toward Muslims
   as more illness than attitude.

   This and this next work reveal the lengths that artists go to combat
   the tortured legacy of the Orientalist gaze. The two stills below are
   from the two channel video installation, Turbulent (1998), by the
   U.S.-Iranian artist Shirin Neshat (b. 1957). It is a poetic yet
   disturbing work that singularly recasts the stereotypical position of
   the mute Muslim woman.
--

   The wordless hymn is like a desperately sad chant welling up from out
   of a crack in a hard surface, be it the barrier of Western expectations
   or the wall of male laws. Even with her eyes closed, we as viewers
   nevertheless feel the weight of her gaze, as some form of corrective to
   delinquent Western assumptions about what Middle Eastern women are, or
   should be.

The Prosthetic gaze

   With the invention of photography came a whole new kind of observer, as
   well as an eruption of conjecture about pictorial truth and evidence.
   ‘Evidential’ is a stock term in photography to designate a category
--
   The apparatus determines to varying degrees what and how things are
   seen—this will be explored more in the next chapter.

   As we have seen already, it is hard if not impossible to locate the
   gaze when it is refracted through a mediating lens whose power to
   augment is at the expense of less perceptible constraints and
   limitations.

   Take the touristic gaze: the camera renders the gaze passive; the gaze
   is annulled for the sake of the static reproduction: the event in situ
   exists for the sake of the dour replica.

   But when we think of two films about photographic vision, Hitchcock’s
   Rear Window (1954) or Antonioni’s Blow-Up (1966), the prosthetic gaze
   of the camera is the defining element in what is seen and understood,
   which singles out the unassailable fact that each are films from the
   first, a medium with its own particular forms of orchestration,
   manipulation and deception.
--

   At first, we are carried along by the ebb and flow of the images’
   ongoing movement determined by the trajectory of the people whom the
   artist is following. We initially assume that it is Acconci who is the
   owner of the gaze, but it quickly dawns on us that his gaze is solely
   at the behest of whom he follows.

   Since he has no other motive but to follow them, it is they who possess
   the gaze; the artist’s surveillance trick sustains itself only upon the
   act of pursuit.

   We too are complicit in this arbitrary magnetic game, since we are the
   only ones who gaze upon both pursuer and pursued. But—to end the
   loop—the artist has intended this to happen, so by default he has the
   last laugh, binding us up in his work’s logic. Everyone is the object
   of another’s gaze, none escape it.

   These shifts and gaps are what caused Jacques Derrida to write Droit de
   regards (‘right of inspection’, or ‘right to gaze) written to accompany
   the photographs by Marie-Françoise Plissart. Plissart’s suite of images
   half-narrates a story involving lesbians, a child in commedia dell’arte
   make-up and finally an interloping male.

   I say ‘half-narrates’ because what preoccupies Derrida are the lacunae,
   the mid-spaces that force the viewer’s assumptions. The kinds of
   transactions that occur within the images convolute the
   self-consciousness of the gaze.

   In other words, we do not know in what capacity we look—as man or
   woman—and whether we are entitled to look at all or at what. Derrida
   goes so far as to claim that the photographs are neither referential
--

   Taking up from Lacan, Sartre and Merleau-Ponty, Derrida’s ambling
   excursus, also with its implicit subtexts of stock photographic theory
   and from French poetics, is more memorable than the photographs
   themselves. He locates a critical area in which the gaze is fractured
   and multi-layered.

The global and sci-fi techno-gaze

   When we get to cyberspace this split of the gaze is constant and
   intricate. There is a chain of mediations whose source is difficult if
   not impossible to locate. With Spyware, surveillance, intrusion takes
   on a new and sinister face.

   The gaze can become small and local and, in the next breath,
   macrocosmic and global, as with Google Earth which is a commercial
   offshoot of ‘Digital Earth’.

   The ‘Digital Earth’ project as it has come to be named was an
--
   agency with the power to lord over the hemisphere like a pagan god,
   when in reality he or she is dupe to the medium, where the distinctions
   between real and virtual are obscured forever.

   These prostheses of the gaze end up becoming imperceptibly incorporated
   within the gaze. We cannot imagine an alternative, believing ourselves
   bereft, incapacitated or non-functional without them.
     __________________________________________________________________

Further Reading
