ART U Lens

     * AAU Lens

Male Gaze in Contemporary Art

   September 14, 2017

   by Ronni Knepp

   The male gaze in art dates centuries back when men created art for the
   viewing by other men.  Women were portrayed in various mediums in order
   to please the male client purchasing/viewing the piece.  One can look
   at paintings such as Venus of Urbino by Titian and see the elongated
   features, welcoming smile, and (obviously) nude position of the woman.
   The same can be said for virtually any other art medium.  Films and
   comics are the same.  They rarely feature female lead roles and their
   physical appearance is often indicative of the stereotypical "ideal
   female form" of that given time period.  Photography, of course, is
   also no stranger to the male gaze, although it is a significantly newer
   art medium then some of the others.

   Venus of Urbino, 1534 by Titian

--
   readdress the issue.  Cindy Sherman created a large series of
   self-portraits in which she portrayed the stereotypical woman from
   housewife to actress.  According to Stefania Sorrentino, "Sherman is
   not perpetuating the objectification of women, but rather subverting
   the male gaze as through this play of masks she makes it almost
   impossible for the male viewer to fix the woman in a steady identity."
   (Curating the Contemporary) Sherman reclaims the power as a woman and
   shows herself willingly in these roles.  Lately, more and more women
   have been pushing back in regards to the male gaze.  Barbara Kruger,
   another well-known feminist and artist, has been creating plenty of
   images using text to bring various topics to light.  On a cover of the
   W magazine, she placed the text "It's all about me - I mean you - I
   mean me" over a nude portrait of Kim Kardashian.
--
   asking for their bodies not to be photoshopped to be skinnier (which is
   all the rage right now in the Western culture).  More and more women
   are standing up against body shaming on both fronts.  That's right
   ladies, we're still at fault here too!  My proposition to help curb the
   male gaze and stereotypes of the "ideal female" is to take the power
   back ourselves.  Create works of art that show our bodies as they
   naturally are, and support each other accordingly.  I'm not aiming for
   any nutritional arguments here (we all know there are risks to obesity
   as well as eating disorders).  But perhaps if we started loving our
   bodies the way they are (stretch marks, muffin top, smaller breasts,
   flatter butt... it doesn't matter!) then we can help to adjust or even
   delete the male gaze entirely.

   Stacy J. Garrett, a photographer based out of Sacramento, California
   features women of all shapes and sizes in her fantastical work.  In the
   majority of the images, the only photoshop done is to seamlessly blend
--
   without enforcing a "perverted" perception of the photo.

   Bluebelle, 2017 by Stacy J. Garrett

   Illustrators can even be included in fight against the male gaze.
   Recently I asked Alex R.R. to do an illustration of myself hugging
   Stitch (yes, I'm a bit of a Disney fan).  Her reply, when she was
   finished, was that she hoped she got my curves perfectly.  This is one
   of the first times I'd ever been given a compliment on my curves!  Not
--
   entirely.  I photographed a set of 25 images of the female nude form,
   but removed all colors and shadows so that the viewer is only left to
   see the form for its lines and shapes.  When viewed as a whole, the
   body takes on even more abstraction as the grid breaks lines apart even
   more, pushing the male gaze further from a possibility.

   Objectified Form 1, 2016 by Ronni Mae Knepp

   Objectified Form Final Grid, 2016 by Ronni Mae Knepp

   Overall, I think as women especially become more proactive in how we
   are shown to the world, the male gaze will eventually dissipate.  Who
   knows if it will ever completely go away.  And even then, there's
   always the question if society will then turn tides to a more prominent
   female gaze.  But that's getting further into theories and what-if's
   that I'm not prepared to speak on at the moment.  The point is that
   although we've grown as a society (women have far more rights and
   responsibilities in the world then they did back during Titian's day),
   we still have a ways to go and grow.

   Sources:

   http://www.thedollarbin.net/shows/2012/10/9/woman-as-object-woman-as-su
   bject-the-male-gaze-and-the-dc-comics-relaunch

   https://curatingthecontemporary.org/2014/11/07/subverting-the-male-gaze
   -femininity-as-masquerade-in-untitled-film-stills-1977-1980-by-cindy-sh
   erman/

   http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2013/12/14/jennifer-lawrence-photoshop_n_
