   literary and arts extravaganza of NIT, Trichy. Subscribe to look at the
   world through a unique looking glass, with our thought-provoking and
   fun reads.

The Female Gaze: Why Women In Art Matter

   Raamanujan
   Raamanujan
   9 min read
--
   1960s. She was, as you might’ve guessed, the only woman in that group.
   And that unique vantage point gave her movies a different perspective
   and feel from her male peers like Jean-Luc Godard and Francois
   Truffaut. This new perspective and the aforementioned quote are at the
   centre of ‘the female gaze’ and what it means. To put it simply, the
   female gaze is a term referring to the perspective of women in the
   creation of art, as well as the representation of women in them. The
   latter point encompasses the portrayal of women having agency. So, all
   genders can tap into the female gaze. The term was coined as an
   extension and response to feminist film theorist Laura Mulvey’s idea of
   ‘the male gaze’. Taking Hitchcock’s Rear Window (1954) as an example,
   she talks about how women are treated as objects of pleasure. Their
   purpose is solely to be looked at; without being able to look back. The
   theme of voyeurism plays a key role in the film, after all. Before we
   delve into examples of the female gaze in art, we should first
   understand the importance of the artist’s role in whatever they create.
   Agnes Varda at the helm

   Perspective is everything in any work of art. Something life-changing
--
   Diego Rivera, all coalesce and manifest themselves into the very
   painting. Kahlo’s paintings often depict her own body and experiences,
   including her physical pain and emotional turmoil. Through her art, she
   asserts her own agency and control over her image, challenging the
   traditional male gaze. There are also many novels, from Daphne Du
   Maurier’s Rebecca to Gillian Flynn’s Gone Girl, that tap into this
   female gaze.
   Frida Kahlo’s most famous work alludes to several things about her
   life: Marriage, culture, and loss.

   And speaking of novels, there is the authorial intent fallacy which
   states that the creator’s intent is irrelevant in understanding their
   creation. This seems to contradict the female gaze by separating the
   text from its author. But it is important to note that it is a type of
   literary criticism that validates the audience’s interpretations rather
   than shunning the artist. Besides, the female gaze doesn’t just apply
   to the artist or the characters in their works. It could also refer to
   us, the audience. The same story viewed through a woman’s lens can
   reveal different unintended interpretations. And this leads to the
   importance of women in art. Whenever someone tells me that the gender
--

   One of the best examples in music, I’d say, is the indie pop icon
   Bjork. She is probably the best example of an artist leveraging her
   culture and life to enhance her art. Her eclectic music and eccentric
   persona are unapologetically and authentically her. The female gaze (I
   suppose ‘voice’ is more fitting) is prevalent in her works, especially
   in her two best albums that are filled with glacial synths and warm
   strings, Homogenic (1997) and Vespertine (2001). Both of these records
   are a celebration of romance and sexuality with a distinctly feminine
--
   records like these is proof that we need more women in various art
   forms.
   Homogenic (Left) and Vespertine (Right): Two brilliant art-pop albums

   Discourse about the female gaze spiked in interest with the release of
   the absolutely phenomenal Portrait of a Lady on Fire by Celine Sciamma
   in 2019. This film is a manifesto about the female gaze, in Sciamma’s
   own words, and is literally and figuratively about gazes, glances, and
   stares. It tells the story of Marianne, a painter commissioned to draw
   a wedding portrait of Heloise, a well-to-do upper-class woman who is
   reluctant to marry. Refusing to pose for the portrait, Marianne is
   forced to memorise her face by accompanying her on daily walks, and
--
   “I saw her…. She didn’t see me”

   In the film, Marianne and Heloise read this story and debate why
   Orpheus looked back. Invoking this myth was a masterstroke by Sciamma
   as she notes that ‘a male gaze can kill you’, literally in this case.
   She flips this tale and tells it from the perspective of Eurydice,
   Heloise in this film’s case, as she asks that what if Eurydice was the
   one who asked Orpheus to look back? Heloise is the one who offers a
   differing perspective in their discussion. When Marianne points out her
   mannerisms after spending time painting her, she reverses the scenario
   and points out Marianne’s nervous mannerisms when she paints. She
   points out that although she is the muse, she also stares back at the
   painter. Much like how Eurydice also gazes at Orpheus when he looks
   back; it is an equal relationship. The distinction between the artist
   and their subject, the observer and the observed, gets blurred.

   One can’t talk about the female gaze without talking about Cleo From 5
   To 7 (1962), directed by none other than Agnes Varda. As you might
   expect at this point, this film revolves around gazes and is thus, an
   essential one to discuss. The titular character, Cleo, will get the
   results of a medical test in two hours that’ll confirm if she has
   cancer or not. And in her anxiety of waiting, the film discusses themes
   of existentialism from a feminine viewpoint. Viewpoints play a big role
