   Home
   ESSAYS
   A Thousand Rivers
   On the Wildness of Children
   The Evaluative Gaze
   Science / Fiction
   Occupy Your Brain
   Three Cups of Fiction
   Film
--
   Home
   ESSAYS
   A Thousand Rivers
   On the Wildness of Children
   The Evaluative Gaze
   Science / Fiction
   Occupy Your Brain
   Three Cups of Fiction
   Film
--
   How a watched pot loses the desire to boil.
     * ESSAYS
     * A Thousand Rivers
     * On the Wildness of Children
     * The Evaluative Gaze
     * Science / Fiction
     * Occupy Your Brain
     * Three Cups of Fiction


Children, Learning, and the 'Evaluative Gaze' of School


     “How a watched pot loses the desire to boil.”

--
   Bear with me here. I'm trying to get at a subtle thing, a thing that
   generally hides in plain sight, although I believe it drives a great
   deal of what happens –– or fails to happen –– in education.

   Call it the 'evaluative gaze' of school.

   There is something profoundly deadening to a curious, engaged child
   about the feeling of being watched and measured, or even, some studies
   suggest, the anticipation of being measured. Sure, some kids seem to
--
   compared to other girls, assessed by “standards” of beauty that many
   can never meet, "standards" by which they are never good
   enough,"standards" that don't take into account their individuality,
   their diversity, their idiosyncratic radiance, the sensation of that
   appraising gaze gets inside them, and not in a good way. Of course the
   ones who are deemed “less than” are hardest hit. But even the girls who
   meet the standards –– the ones who are told they are perfect “10’s”
   –– are demeaned and diminished by this gaze. Under its quantifying eye,
   girls who were funny and fearless and joyful and confident can become
   constrained and self-conscious, hobbled by self-doubt and
   self-loathing. They become prone to depression and anxiety and
   compulsive behaviors. The life seems to leak out of them.

   Alternatively, they eagerly present themselves for the gaze. They
   internalize it on Instagram until they see themselves from the outside
   in, even in their dreams.

    The “evaluative gaze” of school, I have come to believe, does
   something similar to children’s experience of learning. The gaze is
   like the Midas touch: it changes everything it comes in contact
   with. In my case, it’s not that I was worried I would not get a good
   grade; I was an obedient, diligent child, and as far as my teachers
   were concerned, everything I touched was gold. But as Midas discovers
--
   learning, and you let them know you’re watching, and you let them know
   your opinion as though your opinion matters, you just took that thing
   away from them. You just made it yours. Your smell is all over it now.

   The evaluative gaze does the greatest harm, of course, to the kids who
   live under a biased eye; the ones who enter school with a test score or
   a disciplinary record or a skin color that shades the gaze against
   them. Once an assessment of a child's ability has been made, positive
   or negative, that child will feel it; if you think you can conceal it
   from them, you're wrong. They know. They always know. Studies have
   shown that even lab rats learn more slowly if their researchers believe
   that they aren't smart rats. The kids who grow up under a negative
   gaze, the ones who day after day, year after year, feel themselves
   appraised and found wanting –– these kids pay the greatest price, their
   psyches permanently damaged by it, their futures irrevocably harmed.
   (The fact that our appraisals are shown again and again to be wrong
   never seems to discourage us from making them.) But even the kids who
--
   her mind that way?


   Over the years I've watched the many ways that children try to cope
   with the evaluative gaze of school. (The gaze, of course, can come from
   parents, too; just ask my kids.) Some children eagerly display
   themselves for it; some try to make themselves invisible to it. They
   fight, they flee, they freeze; like prey animals they let their bodies
   go limp and passive before it. Some defy it by laughing in its face, by
   acting up, clowning around, refusing to attend or engage, refusing to
   try so you can never say they failed. Some master the art of holding
   back that last 10%, of giving just enough of themselves to "succeed,"
   but holding back enough that the gaze can't define them (they don't yet
   know that this strategy will define and limit their lives.) Some make
   themselves sick trying to meet or exceed the "standards" that it sets
   for them. Some simply vanish into those standards until they don't know
   who they would have been had the standards not been set.

   But the power of the gaze goes beyond the numbers and letters used to
   quantify it. It exists in looks and tones and body language, in words
   and in the spaces between words. It is a way of looking at another
   human being, of confronting another human life; it is a philosophical
   stance, an emotional stance, a political stance, an exercise of power.
   As philosopher Martin Buber might have put it, the stance of true
   relationship says to the other, "I–Thou;" the evaluative gaze says
   "I–It."  It says, "I am the subject; you are the object. I know what
   you are, I know what you should be, I know what 'standards' you must
   meet." It is a god-like stance, which is actually a big deal even if
   you think you are a fair and friendly god.
--

   — Rabindranath Tagore


   The evaluative gaze of school is so constant a presence, so
   all-pervasive an eye, that many people have come to believe that
   children would actually not grow and develop without it. They believe
   that without their "feedback," without their constant "assessment," a
   child's development would literally slow or even stop. They believe
   that children would not learn from the things they experience and do
   and see and hear and make and read and imagine unless they have an
   adult to "assess" them (or unless the adult teaches them to
   "self-assess," which generally means teaching them to internalize the
   adult gaze.) For people whose experience is with children inside the
   school system, it may seem self-evident that this is true. For people
   whose experience is with children outside the school system, it may
   seem like believing that an acorn would not grow into an oak tree
   unless you measure it and give it your opinion. Because an oak tree
--
   give it; it would be impolite not to. But what we should be measuring
   and comparing is not our children but the quality of the learning
   environments we provide for them.

   Girls and women are now fighting back against the appraising gaze that
   objectifies and quantifies them, that teaches them to live their lives
   from the outside in, for the approval of others. But our entire
   education system, the whole hegemonic edifice of curricula and
   standards and data and rubrics and behavior charts and point systems
   and grades and tests, is steeped in a stance of objectifying and
   quantifying children. It teaches them to live from the outside in, to
   view themselves through the gaze of others, to allow themselves to be
   quantified and diminished by those who have the power. The fact that
   the results of this system are consistently racist should not go
   unnoticed or unchallenged. It is not an accident.

   Many teachers do their best to resist the dehumanizing power of the
   gaze, although to their grief they may find harsh limits on what they
   can do. Parents who pull their kids out of school are resisting it,
   although to their grief they may find that the gaze is inside them, and
   gets to their children through their eyes. Children, for their part,
   resist and reject the gaze in a thousand different ways, because deep
   down each child knows she is complex and mysterious beyond your wildest
   dreams, a being with a destiny and purpose here on earth that is not
   known to you or to the testmakers at Pearson or to the people who wrote
   the Common Core Standards. As the poet Rabindranath Tagore once
--




   Fifth graders don't read Foucault, who would write about the gaze a few
   years later in Discipline and Punish. They don't have a critical theory
   that tells them how the gaze is a tool of power, of domination, of
   control. But fifth graders feel it. First graders know it. They know it
   in their bodies, and they act to protect themselves with their
   bodies. When a child does something you can't understand, something
   that doesn't make sense, when they erupt into recklessness, or fold up
   into secrecy and silence, or short-circuit into avoidance, or dissipate
   into fog and unfocus, or lock down into resistance, it's worth asking
   yourself: are they protecting themselves from the gaze?

   That year I decided to protect the things I loved from the evaluative
   gaze of school. For the things I loved, the things I was born into this
   world to make and to do, I did not want school’s petty praise any more
   than I wanted its nit-picking criticisms. When the teacher made us keep
   a journal and hand it in, I wrote some plausible arm’s-length bullshit
   for the grade and put my real thoughts in secret notebooks of my own. I
