
     * Home
     * Learn
     * Schools hub
     * Photographic portraiture: the artist, the sitter and the gaze

Photographic portraiture: the artist, the sitter and the gaze

   Learning resource
     * KS4
     * KS5
--
   Your data is always protected under our Privacy Policy.

Learning objectives

    1. Explore the concept of the gaze.

    2. Analyse the relationship between sitter and photographer.

    3. Investigate how identity can be portrayed through photography.
--
    2. Is he looking at you?

    3. What might this say about him and his identity?

   In portraits, the ‘gaze’ describes the way the artist and sitter look
   at each other, and the way we as viewers look at the person portrayed.

   In exploring the gaze, we analyse:
     * The sitter’s gaze: where the sitter is looking and what their
       expression is. Are they looking out at the artist and at us? Are
       they looking down or to the side or into the distance? Do they look
       confident or unsure?
     * The artist’s gaze: how did they see the sitter when making the
       portrait? How do they want us to see the sitter? How does this
       affect how they present the sitter?
     * Our own gaze as the (BUTTON) viewer Viewer The person looking at an
       artwork. (BUTTON) : how do we look at the person in the portrait?
       What information can we gain by looking at them? Do we interact
       with them, returning their gaze?

   Contemporary photographic portraits are often created through a
   dialogue between sitter and photographer. They decide between them how
   the sitter should appear in the photograph and how their identity
   should be reflected. This includes deciding on their gaze in the
   portrait and how the viewer sees or interacts with them.

Look closer at Riz Ahmed by Sharif Hamza

--
     * View larger image

   Riz Ahmed, by Sharif Hamza, 2018, NPG x200374, © Sharif Hamza
   Riz Ahmed, by Sharif Hamza, 2018
     * (BUTTON) 1. Analyse Riz Ahmed’s gaze. Where is he looking and how
       does this affect how you look at and respond to the portrait?
          + Ahmed faces forward with his head at a slight angle. He gazes
            at the artist Sharif Hamza and the camera, and therefore at us
            the (BUTTON) viewer Viewer The person looking at an artwork.
            (BUTTON) .
          + His expression and steady gaze urge us to look back at him.
     * (BUTTON) 2. How has Sharif Hamza used the background, cropping of
       the photograph and camera angle to direct your gaze and how you
       interact with the portrait?
          + The plain background and close (BUTTON) cropping Cropping To
            cut off part of a photograph, picture or image. (BUTTON) of
            the photograph focuses our attention on Ahmed’s face,
            expression and gaze.
          + Hamza placed the camera directly in front of Ahmed, just below
            eye level. This gives the portrait a ‘no-nonsense’ quality,
            like a document or record.
          + We see Ahmed’s face clearly, despite the shadow. It seems as
            if he is looking straight at us, perhaps about to speak.
     * (BUTTON) 3. Who do you think holds the power in the portrait –
       Ahmed, Hamza or you as the viewer?
          + By focusing on Ahmed’s face and photographing him at just
            below eye level, Hamza has allowed Ahmed to own the gaze and
            take control of his image.
          + Ahmed chooses to look directly out at us, inviting us to
            return his gaze.
          + The relationship between Hamza and Ahmed appears
            collaborative. We are also invited in.
     * (BUTTON) 4. What is your impression of Ahmed’s identity from
       looking at the portrait?
--
          + He is also an (BUTTON) activist Activist A person who works to
            achieve political or social change, especially as a member of
            an organisation with particular aims. (BUTTON) who has raised
            awareness of the lack of diversity in film and television.
          + His direct, even challenging gaze can perhaps be interpreted
            as reflecting his mission to engage others in this important
            debate.

Aida Overton Walker and Stormzy

   Look at these portraits of Aida Overton Walker and Stormzy and compare
   the gaze.
     * View larger image

   Aida Overton Walker in 'In Dahomey', by Cavendish Morton, 1903
     * View larger image

   Stormzy, by Olivia Rose, 2016
    1. What are your first impressions of each portrait?

    2. What do you think the sitter’s gaze tells us about them and their
       identity?

    3. How do the sitters’ pose and the composition of the portraits
       affect our gaze and how we interact with the sitters?

Look closer at Aida Overton Walker by Cavendish Morton

   Aida Overton Walker (1880–1914) was an actor, singer, dancer and
--
   A head and shoulders black-and-white photograph of a Black woman who is
   facing to the side but looking directly at us, the viewer. She wears a
   scarf on her head and a highly embroidered jacket.
   Aida Overton Walker in 'In Dahomey', by Cavendish Morton, 1903
     * (BUTTON) 1. Analyse Aida Overton Walker’s pose, gaze and clothing.
       How does this affect how you look at and engage with the portrait?
          + Aida Overton Walker is (BUTTON) posed Pose A particular
            position in which somebody stands or sits to have their
            portrait made. (BUTTON) sideways to the camera, but she looks
--
            looking at an artwork. (BUTTON) .
          + This is unexpected as her (BUTTON) pose Pose A particular
            position in which somebody stands or sits to have their
            portrait made. (BUTTON) suggests that she will be looking away
            from us and thus become the object of our gaze.
          + Her expression is difficult to read. It could be seen as
            confident, curious and defiant. But it might also be seen as
            if she is looking with caution or even fear.
          + Her unexpected gaze makes the portrait look less formal and
            more human, giving it a surprisingly contemporary feel. It
            seems as if she is challenging our expectations.
          + She wears a theatrical costume and her hair hangs loosely
            around her face. This adds to the informal look of the
--
            expectations.
          + Being on the stage at that time was not always considered a
            respectable profession for women.
          + Many photographs of actresses and dancers from the early 1900s
            were made for viewers to gaze at, as if the (BUTTON) sitters
            The person in a portrait A person who sits or stands somewhere
            so that somebody can paint a picture of them or photograph
            them.  (BUTTON) were (BUTTON) exotic Exotic Something exciting
            and unusual because it seems to be connected with foreign
            countries. (BUTTON) curiosities.
          + The power lay with the (mainly male) (BUTTON) viewer Viewer
            The person looking at an artwork. (BUTTON) . Overton Walker
            takes back the power with her engaging gaze.
     * (BUTTON) 3. How do the background and cropping of the portrait
       affect your gaze and how you interact with the image?
          + The plain background and close (BUTTON) cropping Cropping To
            cut off part of a photograph, picture or image. (BUTTON) of
            the portrait focus our attention on Overton Walker.
          + This approach to composition is one that we still see in
--
     * View larger image

   Stormzy, by Olivia Rose, 2016, NPG x200706, Olivia Rose
   Stormzy, by Olivia Rose, 2016
     * (BUTTON) 1. Analyse Stormzy’s pose and gaze. How does this affect
       how he comes across and how you respond to the portrait?
          + In this full-length portrait, Rose shows Stormzy sitting
            informally on a chair looking down at the ground.
          + He appears deep in thought and his gaze is one of (BUTTON)
            contemplation Contemplation The act of thinking deeply about
            something. (BUTTON) . This is not how we expect to see a
            successful musician posing in a photograph. It is as if we
            have caught him off-guard.
--
            viewer Viewer The person looking at an artwork. (BUTTON) – are
            doing the looking, Stormzy seems comfortable with being looked
            at.
     * (BUTTON) 2. How has Olivia Rose used camera angle, composition and
       cropping to direct your gaze and your interaction with the
       portrait?
          + Rather than standing to take the photograph (and looking down
            at Stormzy), Rose placed the camera at the same height as him.
            This suggests that she was also sitting or crouching down.
--
          + At first, it seems that Olivia Rose with her camera and we as
            the (BUTTON) viewer Viewer The person looking at an artwork.
            (BUTTON) hold the power in the portrait – as we are doing the
            looking and Stormzy is being looked at.
          + But despite Stormzy’s contemplative, downward gaze, his
            (BUTTON) pose Pose A particular position in which somebody
            stands or sits to have their portrait made. (BUTTON) is
            confident and relaxed. With knees apart and arms resting on
            his knees, his body forms a strong rectangular shape that
            dominates the composition. The shape is emphasized by the
            geometric shapes of the architecture that surrounds him.
     * (BUTTON) 5. Olivia Rose has described her photographs of young men
       as ‘masculinity reinterpreted via [the] feminine gaze.’ Consider
       this statement. Does it change how you look at the portrait?
          + This portrait is not the type of portrait we expect to see of
            a successful man.
          + Stormzy does not gaze out of the portrait confidently,
            demanding attention and expecting praise.
          + As well as being a musician, Stormzy is an (BUTTON) activist
            Activist A person who works to achieve political or social
            change, especially as a member of an organisation with
            particular aims. (BUTTON) who speaks out against injustices.
            It is perhaps this thinking, caring side of Stormzy that Rose
            got to know and wanted to reflect in the portrait.

    1. What have you discovered about the gaze in portraits?

    2. How can analysing the gaze help us to read a portrait and
       understand the identity of a sitter?

    3. How does a sitter’s gaze affect the dynamic between us and them and
       how we interact with a portrait?

Explore further

   Choose a photographic portrait that interests you from below and
   analyse the gaze.
     * View larger image

   Alesha Dixon, by Simon Frederick, 2016, NPG P2054, © Simon Frederick /
   National Portrait Gallery
--
    1. Historically, artists and viewers were usually men. How do you
       think this might have affected how women appeared and were looked
       at in portraits?

    2. Try exploring the gaze in your own photographic portraits.
       Photograph a friend or family member looking at the camera and then
       photograph them looking away from the camera.
       How does this change the portrait and how you respond to the sitter
       and their identity?
