    #The Battalion RSS 2.0 The Battalion RSS .92 The Battalion Atom 0.3
   The Battalion » Opinion: Men don’t know what the female gaze is
   Comments Feed oEmbed (JSON) oEmbed (XML) JSON

   Skip to Content

--
   Big bruh (2 of 2)
   Satire: A day of overindulgence
   December 9, 2025

Opinion: Men don’t know what the female gaze is

   The key to understanding what women want is learning what the female
   gaze is.
   Maddie McMurrough, Opinion Writer
   April 19, 2024
   What do women really want? Opinion writer Maddie McMurrough says the
   key to answering this age-old question lies in an understanding of the
   female gaze. (Graphic by Selena Casino)
   What do women really want? Opinion writer Maddie McMurrough says the
   key to answering this age-old question lies in an understanding of the
   female gaze. (Graphic by Selena Casino)

   Every woman who has felt the pressures of society can understand the
   concept of the male gaze. Think of Charlotte McKinney in the Hardee’s
   commercials, Megan Fox in the Transformer movies or Daisy Dukes shorts,
   inspired by the character from the ‘70s TV show “Dukes of Hazzard.”

   If those examples aren’t conjuring a clear enough image, the male gaze
   is a way of framing advertisements, creating media of all kinds and
   even developing aspects of our culture through a heterosexual lens of
   the “ideal woman” and the ultimate fantasy men want. This female
   archetype is innocent, yet sexy. Naive, hyper-feminine and obedient.

   Now, I want to make it clear. This isn’t going to be a misandrist
   tirade — I don’t believe all men see the world through the male gaze.
   However, the inspiration for this article came to me as I was scrolling
   through TikTok, as all good ideas begin. An indie boy in a sweater vest
   lip-synced to “Too Sweet” by the female gaze master himself, Hozier.
   The caption of the TikTok was three words: “The Female Gaze.”

   I hate to break it to you, but it takes more than a soft-boy clothing
   style and pandering song choice to achieve the female gaze. Then it
   dawned on me: some men simply don’t understand what the female gaze is.
   So, since us girls have a one-up on you, I’m gonna level the playing
   field and teach you what women want by explaining the female gaze.

   The gendered gaze is, at its core, what men and women find most
   appealing about the opposite sex, along with enforcing archetypes that
   each gender should exemplify in society.

   The female gaze is ultimately about finding strength in yourself as
   well as highlighting the qualities that we find most admirable in men
   and society.

   Media examples of the female gaze usually feature romantic men who show
   intimacy and empathize with the female lead. Think of 2005’s “Pride &
   Prejudice,” based on the novel by Jane Austen. The enemies-to-lovers
   trope, the subtle glances, gentle touches and enchanting romance.

   We want you to be gentle, sensitive and romantic. This is how men are
   characterized in the female gaze — we see your flaws and love you in
   spite of them.

   Since we’re tackling extremely nuanced theories and I’ve only barely
   grazed the surface of the two, I’m going to give you a side-by-side
--
   Another example is “Elvis,” directed by Baz Luhrmann, versus
   “Priscilla,” directed by Sofia Coppola. It’s the same story just told
   through completely different lenses, perspectives and aesthetics.

   Now, the female gaze and the male gaze represented in the media are the
   extremes. It’s more subtle and harder to recognize in the wild, but
   keeping an open mind and understanding what it entails is the first
   step in appealing to women through the female gaze.

   Real-life application of the gaze is so simple it almost feels like
   we’re asking for the bare minimum. Show her you’re proud to be with
   her. Let her bring out the best in you. Take the time to empathize and
   listen. The opportunities are endless, as romance under the female gaze
   — and in general — is about the small things.

   It’s about seeing the beauty in the simple things and loving them in
   spite of their simplicity; nothing too complicated. If all else fails
--
   inauthenticity; if you’re spouting romantic words for the sake of a
   one-night stand, it comes off as gross. Mean what you say and say what
   you mean.

   Now that you understand the tip of the female gaze iceberg, you’re
   beginning to get a grasp of what women really want — I don’t want to
   see another Reddit post of a guy saying that they don’t understand what
   women want from them. Consume media that may challenge your point of
   view, step in the shoes of the opposite sex and keep an open mind.
--
       situation. I also this that there are more people (men) as well
       that are getting sick of the constant objectification of women.
       Like, “they are just”. I’ve seen female characters like this
       countless times and it’s just frustrating.
       But do you think there is a way the men’s gaze and the female gaze
       could meet at the middle?
       As a guy, I know a lot of men that are static and very simple. So
       the whole romance thing may not work out for them. Some because of
       mysogny others because they aren’t just women.
       Don’t get me wrong I do think that men, in the long run what
       something other than what pleases the eyes.
       I just feel like men just focusing on the female gaze will put them
       in an uncomfortable spot the same way the male gaze put the women.
       Anyways, I’m sure you won’t even see this. But love the article
       Reply (BUTTON) Recommend (BUTTON) Share
       https://thebatt.com/opinion/opinion-men-dont-know-what-the-female-g
       aze-is/#comment-303
          + S
            Shawn • Nov 13, 2024 at 11:03 am
            I can understand it being frustrating to feel like men need to
            change their gaze. But I don’t think that’s what this article
            is asking. The point of a gendered “gaze” is what one gender
            (generally speaking) finds attractive. There isn’t really a
            need to “meet in the middle” because then you’re asking people
            to change what they find attractive, which is hard to do.
            I think what this article is really asking is for people to
            understand what the other gender’s gaze is. And it’s primarily
            asking this of men because women, for the most part, already
            know what the male gaze is since growing up inside a
            patriarchy inherently means living inside a society built
            around the male gaze. Many women are raised, from toddlers, to
            care about the male gaze, and they receive advice regularly
            about what men want. By contrast, when I hear men give or
            receive advice about what women want, the advice is given
            through the male gaze which doesn’t make sense.
            If men paid closer attention to what the female gaze actually
            is, we might see less content erroneously telling men that all
            women are hypergamous, or that only “Chads” who are 8+
            attractive can get dates, or that men need to make 6 figures
            to attract a woman.
            The reason the male gaze can put women in an uncomfortable
            position is because it often oversexualizes them — it puts
            them into a box where their main and most significant value is
            their appearance; it treats women as objects, not people. At
            best, it results in women who don’t meet the male gaze being
            invisible. At worst, it results in actual violence. And to be
            clear, it’s not the male gaze itself that is the issue — it’s
            the actions that stem from it that are.
            But I genuinely have a hard time imagining how the female gaze
            — wanting men who are open, honest, empathetic, and attentive
            — is going to put men in an uncomfortable position. If it is
            uncomfortable for a person to possess the four traits listed
            (which I expect most people, regardless of gender, would agree
            are traits of a well-adjusted and mature human being) then
            that doesn’t sound like a “gaze” problem, that sounds like a
            personal problem for that individual. They might consider
            working on that just for their own personal growth.
            Reply (BUTTON) Recommend (BUTTON) Share
            https://thebatt.com/opinion/opinion-men-dont-know-what-the-fem
            ale-gaze-is/#comment-524

   (BUTTON) Close

   (BUTTON) Close Modal Window
