The Language of Eye Movements – Part Two

   GalleryAug 11

   Gaze Behavior

   It is only when you see “eye to eye” with another person that a real
   basis for communication can be established. While some people can make
   us feel quite comfortable when they converse with us, others can make
   us feel “ill at ease and some seem untrustworthy.” This has to do
   primarily with the length of time that they look at us or hold our gaze
   as they speak. When a person is being dishonest or holding back
   information his eyes meet ours less than one-third of the time. When a
   person’s gaze meets ours for more than two thirds of the time, it can
   mean one of two things; first, he or she finds us very interesting or
   appealing, in which case the gaze will be associated with dilated
   pupils; secondly, he or she is hostile towards you and may be issuing a
   non-verbal challenge, in which case the pupils will become constricted.
   When person A like’s person B, he will look at him a lot. This causes B
   to think that A likes him.

   Like most body language and gestures, the length of time that one
   person gazes at another is culturally determined. Southern Europeans
   have a high frequency of gaze that may be offensive to others and the
   Japanese gaze at the neck rather than at the face when conversing. We
   have to consider cultural circumstances before jumping to conclusions.

   Not only is the length of the gaze significant; just as important is
   the geographical area of the person’s face and body at which you direct
   your gaze, as this also affects the outcome of a negotiation. These
   signals are transmitted and received non-verbally and are accurately
   interpreted by the receiver.

   The following eye techniques can be effectively used to improve your
   communication skills:

   The Business Gaze

   When having discussions on a business level, imagine that there is a
   triangle on the other person’s forehead. By keeping your gaze directed
   at this area, you create a serious atmosphere and the other person
   senses that you mean business. Provided that your gaze does not drop
   below the level of the other person’s eyes, you are able to maintain
   control of the interaction.

   The Social Gaze

   When the gaze drops below the other person’s eye level, a social
   atmosphere develops. Experiments into gazing reveal that during social
   encounters the gazer’s eyes also look in a triangular area on the other
   person’s face, in this case between the eyes and the mouth.

   The Intimate Gaze

   The gaze is across the eyes and below the chin to other parts of the
   person’s body. In close encounters it is the triangular area between
   the eyes and the chest or breasts and for distant gazing from the eyes
   to the crotch. Men and women use this gaze to show interest in each
   other and those who are interested will return the gaze.

   Sideways Glance

   The sideways glance is used to communicate either interest or
--
   or critical attitude.

   Summary

   The area of the other person’s body upon which you direct your gaze can
   have a powerful effect on the outcome of any face-to-face encounter. If
   you were a manager who was going to reprimand a lazy employee, which
   gaze would you use? If you used the social gaze, the employee would
   take less heed of your words, regardless of how loud or threatening you
   sounded. The social gaze would take the sting out of your words and the
   intimate gaze would either intimidate or embarrass the employee. The
   business gaze is the appropriate one to use, as it has a powerful
   effect on the receiver and tells him that you are serious.

   What men describe as the “come-on” look that women use relates to a
   sideways glance and an intimate gaze. If a man or woman wants to play
   hard to get, he or she needs only avoid using the intimate gaze and
   instead use the social gaze. To use the business gaze during courting
   would cause a man or woman to be labeled as cold or unfriendly. The
   point is that when you use the intimate gaze on a potential partner,
   you give the game away. Women are expert at sending and receiving this
   type of gaze but unfortunately, most men are not. Men are usually
   obvious when they use the intimate gaze and they are generally unaware
   of having been given an intimate gaze, much to the frustration of the
   woman who has transmitted it.

   Eye Block Gesture

--
   a conversation, it is a signal that the approach you are using may be
   causing a negative reaction and that a new tack is needed if effective
   communication is to take place.

   Controlling a Person’s Gaze

   It is worth discussing at this point how to control a person’s gaze
   when you are giving him a visual presentation using books, charts,
   graphs and so on. Research shows that of the information relayed to a
   person’s brain, 87 per cent comes via the eyes, 9 per cent via the
   ears, and 4 per cent via the other senses. If, for example, the person
   is looking at your visual aid as you are speaking, he will absorb as
   little as 9 per cent of your message if the message is not directly
   related to what he sees. If the message is related to the visual aid,
   he will absorb only 25 to 30 per cent of your message if he is looking
   at the visual aid. To maintain maximum control of his gaze, use a pen
   or pointer to point to the visual aid and at the same time verbalize
   what he sees. Next, lift the pen from the visual aid and hold it
   between his eyes and your own eyes.

