    2. Home
    3. Video
    4. Types of Video

Types of Gaze in Film: Perspectives and Power Dynamics

   Scroll to top
   Marie Gardiner
   Marie Gardiner
   Aug 12, 2024 • 9 min read
   Copied to clipboard!
   Types of Video

   “The Gaze” is how we (the audience) view characters and events in a
   film, and how that shapes our perceptions. Understanding the different
   types of gaze in film can help us appreciate the nuances of
   storytelling, plus underlying power dynamics. Let’s take a look.

A Quick History of Gaze

   The idea of the gaze in art and literature has been around for a really
   long time, but in 1975, Laura Mulvey introduced the idea of the male
   gaze in her essay Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema, explaining that
   women are often seen from a masculine perspective, making them seem
   passive and objectifying them.

     “It is said that analysing pleasure, or beauty, destroys it. That is
--
   Mulvey was writing at an important time for feminism, with a second
   wave focusing on equality and discrimination.

   Since then, academics and filmmakers have built on that idea to include
   various types of gaze, each one giving a particular insight into
   representation, power dynamics, and how the audience engages. These
   have also changed and evolved with society, as it’s slowly become more
   inclusive and diverse.

Types of Gaze

The Male Gaze

   Let’s start with the ‘original’ gaze in cinema, as coined by Mulvey.
   This type of gaze positions women as passive objects of male desire,
   which in turn reinforces gender roles and power imbalances. Mulvey
   spoke of two types of male gaze: voyeuristic and fetishistic. The
   former is a controlling gaze – based in control and punishment, and the
   latter is based in a type of reassurance, a raising up of the image of
   a woman in a cult-like way.

   Please accept marketing cookies to load this content.
--
   follows and objectifies the main female character Madeleine, who is
   followed by an ex police officer (Scottie) hired by her husband.
   Scottie becomes obsessed with Madeleine to the point of finding a woman
   who looks like her and trying to shape her in Madeleine’s image. In
   this instance the male gaze isn’t just implied, it’s actually part of
   the narrative, with the main male character following, watching, and
   objectifying a woman.

   The Bond films are another good example of this, where the female
   characters have mostly been ‘eye candy’. Examples like this reinforce
   the idea that a woman’s value lies solely in physical attractiveness,
   and by recognising that – by understanding the male gaze – we can
   engage more critically with the film (or whatever else it may be) and
   push for better representations.

Quick Look
--
     * Narratives that centre around male characters, with female
       characters only as objects or plot devices.
     * Reinforces traditional gender roles and power imbalances.

The Female Gaze

   As you might guess, the female gaze is a focus on showing women as
   complex, nuanced characters. Subjects, rather than passive objects. The
   female gaze often challenges traditional narratives and there’s often a
   focus on relationships, connection, empathy, and emotions.

   Directors like Jane Campion and Ava DuVernay are known for their
   complex female characters and the female gaze.

   Please accept marketing cookies to load this content.
   THE PIANO - Official 25th Anniversary Trailer - Starring Holly Hunter
   and Harvey Keitel
--
     * Narratives that give women agency and complex roles.
     * Challenges traditional gender roles and offers a more nuanced
       portrayal of relationships.

The Queer Gaze

   This gaze challenges heteronormative perspectives and centres the
   experiences of LGBT+ characters and creators. The lives of individuals
   and groups are shown in a way that feels authentic and relatable
   without stereotypes and tropes. The queer gaze questions societal norms
   around sexuality and identity and asks us to look beyond binary
   definitions of gender and sexuality. It also has a big emphasis on
   fluidity and ambiguity either through characters or through the story
   being told.
--
     * Narratives that challenge binary views of gender and sexuality.
     * Often includes non-linear storytelling and complex character
       development.

The Oppositional Gaze (Sometimes The Black Gaze or The Racial Gaze)

   Coined by Gloria Jean Watkins (known by her pen name bell hooks) in The
   Oppositional Gaze: Black Female Spectators. This gaze centres around
   the agency of Black people and how historically they’ve been denied
   their right to ‘gaze,’ or critically engage with media. It also
   addresses that the portrayal of Black women even by Black male
   filmmakers is often still that of an object, of the male gaze, which
   actually perpetuates white supremacy. The Oppositional gaze encourages
   the audience – particularly those from marginalised groups – to
   critically engage with media and question biases, stereotypes and
   omissions from narrative film.

   Please accept marketing cookies to load this content.
   Get Out Official Trailer 1 (2017) - Daniel Kaluuya Movie
   [maxresdefault.jpg]

   Jordan Peele’s Get Out is a recent example of the oppositional gaze in
   horror/thriller cinema. We follow a young Black man who uncovers a
   terrible truth about his white girlfriend’s family. While the movie
   uses satire and suspense, it’s also heavily critiquing systemic racism
   and the exploitation of Black bodies.
--
     * Narratives that challenge stereotypes and offer more authentic
       portrayals.
     * Encourages critical engagement with media to challenge biases.

The Gaze and Power Dynamics

   The gaze in film isn’t just about who is looking and how, but also
   about power. Different types of gaze can reinforce or challenge power
   structures, both in the narrative and wider, in society. Understanding
   how gaze influences power dynamics can help audiences appreciate
   storytelling on a deeper level, and also see the importance of diverse
   perspectives.

   Please accept marketing cookies to load this content.
--
   In The Handmaid’s Tale – based on the book by Margaret Atwood – we can
   see the power dynamics between the oppressive regime and the subjugated
   women, but that isn’t the whole story. The handmaids (and other female
   captives) are shown to us (through things like intense close ups of the
   protagonist's eyes) as resistant, resilient, strong. This gaze is a
   challenge to the power ‘norms’ of the patriarchal structures in the
   show, and it’s a powerful commentary on gender and autonomy. In this
   instance the women aren’t just male-gaze-objects, but
   female-gaze-subjects, with depth of character.

The Gaze and Documentary

   small child being tended to by volunteer small child being tended to by
   volunteer small child being tended to by volunteer

   We’ve talked mostly about narrative film here, but what about
   documentary? Do documentary films have gazes? The quick answer is, they
   do! The gaze in documentaries can shape how we see the people involved
   and it can influence how authentic and impactful the story is. There’s
   an interesting thesis by Ambra Reijnen that looks at The Outsider’s
   Gaze in Documentary, examining the ethics of filming in a community
   that the director doesn’t belong. There are power dynamics at play in
   documentary gaze too, the control the filmmaker has over the narrative
   can greatly influence the power balances between people interviewed,
   the audience, and the director themselves. Some documentaries actually
   feature the filmmaker; does that change the ‘gaze’? I think so, as it
   becomes more participatory, and the audience becomes more connected to
   the person presenting the material.

Quick Look: Some Sub-Genres in Documentary Films

   The type of documentary genre can impact the ‘gaze’. Here are some of
   the types of documentary sub-genres and what they involve:

Observational

--
   A subjective experience and deep involvement of the filmmaker with
   personal narratives, emotional engagement, and sometimes a blurring of
   fiction and reality.

Does Animation Use Gaze?

   Please accept marketing cookies to load this content.
   Disney's Frozen Official Trailer
   [maxresdefault.jpg]
--
   It does! Though kids’ cartoons go a little lighter with intent, it’s
   actually easier to do in many ways because animators have control over
   the whole scene. The same subverting of roles, or cultural and social
   commentary can be done in animation as it is in regular film. As an
   example, in Frozen we can very much see The Female Gaze as we focus on
   the bond between Elsa and her sister Anna rather than a romantic
   relationship, which dominates many older animations aimed at children.

Conclusion: What is Gaze in Film

   Gaze is a powerful tool that helps guide the way stories are seen and
   interpreted. Filmmakers use gaze to direct attention, convey emotions,
   and to add commentary on societal issues. By exploring and
   understanding different types of gaze we can appreciate diverse
   perspectives, learn more about culture, challenge biases, and subvert
   tropes.

More Free Film Theory Articles
