   #Understanding Visual Culture » Feed Understanding Visual Culture »
   Comments Feed Understanding Visual Culture » The Gaze Tag Feed
   Understanding Visual Culture WordPress.com

   Skip to content
     * Assignments
--
   the Author Dick Hebdige Dirty Windows Discipline and Punish Divine
   Violence Dorothea Lange Douglas Crimp Easton Portraits Edvard Munch
   Edward Weston Elsabeth Tonnard Engels Essentialism Evans and Hall Farm
   Security Administration Fenichel Ferdinand de Saussure fetish Freud FSA
   Garry Winogrand Gendering the Gaze George Georgiou George Lukács
   Grayson Perry Greenberg Greg McKeown Gustave Courbet Guy Debord Hannah
   Jane Parkinson Harrison and Wood Her Holy Bible Hunger (2009)
   Hypernormalisation ideological state apparatus ideology Image Music
   Text Instagram interpellation intertextually intratextually Jack
--
   analysis Sturken and Cartwright Sugar Children Suicide Girls
   Superstructure Surrealism syntagm Takashi Murakami Taxi Driver Ten-8
   The 'Other' The Americans The Arcades Project The bottom line on planet
   one The Day Nobody Died The Displaced Image The dissolution of the
   Oedipus complex The Face the flâneur The Gaze The Gleaners The
   Interaction of Media The interpretation of dreams The mirror-phase The
   mirror-phase as formative of the function of the I The nature of
   photographs The Painter of Modern Life The Panopticon The Social
   Definition of Photography The Stone Breakers The Work of Art in the Age
--
Understanding Visual Culture

Michael Millmore – Learning Blog

The Gaze

Project 4-4: Gendering the Gaze

   Read the chapter by Laura Mulvey called Visual Pleasure and Narrative
   Cinema on pps 381 – 389 of the course reader making notes.

   Notes on the Gaze

   Sturken and Cartwright (2009) define the in relation to visual arts as:

   “the relationship of looking in which the subject is caught up in the
   dynamics of desire through trajectories of looking and being looked at
   among other people.” (Sturken and Cartwright, 2009: 442)

   The gaze can be both motivated by the subjects desire for control over
   the object it sees, and the object can likewise capture and hold the
   look.

   Pooke and Newall (2008) assert that in the field of art, gaze refers to
   the viewers engagement with the art object and is frequently suggestive
   of a power dynamic between the object and the spectator. The term Gaze
   is used prominently in film and gender studies.

   Modern origins of the gaze are based on psychoanalytic theory and
   relates to visual and sexual attentions and the implications of
   gendered human perception that these contain. Gazing is considered
   central to sexual attraction and has both a positive and negative
   identification, for example, narcissistic (loving/productive) and
--

   “Looking is powerful. To look is to assert power, to control, to
   challenge authority.” (D’Alleva, 2012: 104)

   A distinction is made between Gaze and gaze (lower case g): Gaze – the
   process of looking which constitutes a network of relationships, gaze –
   a specific instance of looking. Freud saw desire as crucial to the
   process of looking. Lacan saw the Gaze as one of the main
   manifestations of the four fundamental concepts of psychoanalysis: the
   unconscious, repetition, transference and drive. For Lacan, the Gaze
   gives structure and stability to our fantasies of Self and Other.
   Looking at art is not a neutral process but one where the viewer is a
   desiring subject open to the captivation asserted by the work being
   viewed. The function of art is to trap the Gaze because the viewer is
   (falsely) put in the position of the eye.

   Film theorists of the 1970s (such as Laura Mulvey and Christian Metz)
   used the theories of Freud and Lacan to posit that in cinema the Gaze
   of the spectator on the image was implicitly male and objectified women
   on screen. Lacan’s analysis of the Gaze (for example, the mirror-phase)
   form an important part of feminist discussions of how women are
   constructed as the object of a ‘male gaze’ in film and visual arts with
   a particular feminist interest being the relations between looking,
   imagery and power in society.

   Notes on ‘Visual pleasure and narrative cinema’ by Laura Mulvey
--
   In ‘Visual pleasure and narrative cinema’, Laura Mulvey drew on
   psychoanalytic theories of Freud and Lacan to challenge patriarchal
   models of viewing. Hollywood cinema of the 1930s-50s was used to
   illustrate how pleasure in looking is split between the active/male
   protagonist/hero who possesses the Gaze and moves the action forward,
   and, the passive/female who is the object of the desire and the object
   of the Gaze.

   Arguing that Hollywood cinema is geared toward male viewing pleasure,
   and related directly to the construction of the male psyche. This both
   reinforced patriarchal society and Mulvey used the psychoanalytical
--
   screen. Is a function of sexual instincts.

   Voyeurism – the pleasure taken in looking while not being seen to be
   looking. This carries negative connotations of a powerful, even
   sadistic, position within the Gaze.

   Narcissism – identification with the image seen – linked to
   construction of the ego. Demands identification of the ego with the
   object in screen through the spectators fascination and recognition of
   his like. Is a function of the ego libido.

   Mulvey linked pleasure gained from the male gaze in three ways:
    1. Woman’s objectification in the gaze of the male characters and
       audience stimulates the pleasures of erotic fantasy.
    2. Identification with the male protagonist by male viewers links to
       the development of the ego – identified by Lacan as the
       mirror-phase: the stage which creates misrecognition in the child’s
--
   complete with beauty but damaged by phallic absence, is the fetish that
   makes the site of the lack – the difference that forms the possibility
   of meaning and on which language is built.

   A common criticism of Mulvey’s paper is that the Gaze she discusses is
   strictly male (also white and heterosexual) and this view does more to
   fix identity than free it. However, this misses the point that the
   essay is a polemic in which the male Gaze is a strategic necessity in
   order for Mulvey to make the case that although Hollywood narrative
   cinema appeared to be innocent entertainment it is really an instrument
   of patriarchal ideology. Despite what they term the “intellectual
   problems” of some aspects of Mulvey’s work, Lapsley and Westlake (2006)
--
   analogy of the Hollywood star system in which the stars (especially the
   women) are no more than property to the studios.

   Themes of the film include desire and artificiality, subjectivity,
   female objectification and the male Gaze. Hitchcock was influenced by
   Freud and surrealism and draws on Freud’s theories of scopophillia.
   Stylistically the film is almost entirely shot from Scottie’s
   perspective with the audience becoming complicit in his voyeurism.
   Dreamy tracking shots are used in the sequences where he follows both
   Madeline and Judy, the camera moves with Scottie and reflect his
   snatched glimpses, wonderment and desire. The pastel colours of the
   films design give a overemphasised artificiality which add to the
   dreamlike quality. Occasionally our gaze is returned by Novak as
   Madeline/Judy – at these points we feel her accusing our voyeurism.
   Reflecting on Vertigo’s narrative, the entire film seems completely
   implausible, particularly why Madeline/Judy would allow herself to be
   first manipulated into Elster’s murderous scheme and then allow Scottie
   to change her appearance. The only logical explanation is that, as
   Mulvey argues, woman is presented as image and man as bearer of the
   look. This emphasises the inherent sexual imbalance in which the
   (active) determining male gaze projects its fantasy onto the female
   figure (passive) which is styled accordingly.

   Mulvey has the following to say about Vertigo: the look is central to
   the plot – oscillating between voyeurism and fetishist fascination.
--
   drop-it-like-its-hot-4

   drop-it-like-its-hot-1

   Annotate  Manet’s  ‘Olympia’  in  terms  of  the  gaze  and  the
   various  characters, within and without the image.

   manet-olympia

   Manet’s ‘Olympia’ (1863) was considered scandalous and vulgar when
   first displayed, interestingly this has nothing to do with the model
   being nude but rather the unconventional subject depicted and her
   seemingly oppositional returned gaze. Rather than depicting an
   idealised subject based on history or myth as was the convention of
   nineteenth century painting, the model is a prostitute, and, most
   significantly, rather than complying with codes of humility and
   compliance her returned gaze is ambiguous and unsettling. Manet based
   the composition of the painting on Titian’s Venus of Urbino (1538) and
   comparing the two paintings emphasise the differences and why ‘Olympia’
   caused such controversy. Firstly the subject matter – Titian is
   depicting Venus, an ideal representation of the female form and
--
   control over her body. The position suggests that while her nakedness
   can be looked at for free, anything further will require payment.

   The most striking aspect of Manet’s painting, as previously mentioned,
   is the way the model in ‘Olympia’ returns our gaze. Unlike Titian’s
   model her head is held high and points directly out of the painting –
   there can be no doubt that the subject of her gaze is the viewer. This
   is further emphasised by the way the black servant in the painting is
   ignored despite appearing to bring a gift of flowers – her stare seems
   to challenge the viewer. Given the typical audience at the time would
   have been white, middle/upper class, western male this surely would
--
   London: Continuum International Publishing Group

   Posted on October 2, 2016January 8, 2017 by Michael Millmore Posted in
   General, Project 4-4, Projects Tagged Alfred Hitchcock, Freud,
   Gendering the Gaze, Jacques Lacan, Lacan, Laura Mulvey, Manet, Olympia,
   Project 4-4, Projects, Rap, Snoop Dogg, The Gaze, The mirror-phase,
   Vertigo, Visual Pleasure and Narrative Cinema 1 Comment

   Blog at WordPress.com.

