   instagram youtube facebbok twitter pinterest linkedin

   Sign In

   Venus of Urbino | Female Gaze | STIRworld
   Venus of Urbino | Female Gaze | STIRworld
   Venus of Urbino Image: Courtesy of Wikimedia Commons
   Art 06 mins. read

     * Stir
     * Think
     * Opinions
     *

The art of the female gaze…what is it?

   Exploring the evolving lens of the female gaze beyond filmic studies.

   by Girinandini SinghPublished on : Oct 22, 2021
     *
     *
     *
     *
     *

   The concept of the male gaze as examined in Laura Mulvey’s Visual
   Pleasure and Narrative Cinema looks at the depiction of women in art
   and film as embodying a passive and somewhat disempowered role. In art
   history, time and again one sees that most female depictions place the
   observer in a power position, disarming the female heroine by making
--
   From the 16th century Venus of Urbino to the varied modern depictions
   of comic-book superheroines like Wonder Woman and Catwoman, the female
   form is depicted as though catering to some voyeuristic fantasy that is
   impossible to reach and realise in real life. This question of the male
   gaze deals, in a manner of speaking, with the age-old debate around the
   idea of beauty as a currency, the value of being beautiful and beauty
   as a symbol of power. As we continue to confront this notion, we are
   also looking at its modern iterations, one example of which is the
   ‘pretty privilege’ sweeping social media’s algorithmic recommendations,
   pushing content that meets modern standards of beauty over the content
   that perhaps is less representative of it but equally of value. More
   than ever now we are hearing about the importance and the need for
   adopting what is known as the ‘female gaze’, be it in films, social
   media, or art. But what exactly is the female gaze? Is it the next big
   buzzword bound to lose some of its heft or is it perhaps the beginnings
   of a new more balanced form of depiction of the feminine, as being more
   than just an object of fantasy?
   Olympia | Female Gaze | STIRworld Olympia Image: Courtesy of Creative
   Commons

   How does an artwork exemplify the feminine gaze? Is it enough for it to
   have been made by a woman? Where does self-objectification fall in this
   spectrum, for a spectrum it is? In her revolutionary writing, Mulvey
   never used the term ‘female gaze’, she spoke out against the male gaze,
   specifically in terms of film theory namely against Hitchcock’s Rear
   Mirror, where the male lead rather literally objectifies the women into
   objects of pleasure to be either dominated or consumed – a passive
   object neither active nor dynamic, in ways denied of individuality and
   personality. The female gaze on the other hand as one understands it is
   empathetic in that it focuses on agency and more so the internal and
   emotional landscape of depiction. Things don’t happen to the character,
   rather we have a window into her rich inner world. In films it is
   perhaps easier to differentiate between the female gaze as opposed to
   the male gaze but in art where do we come to stand?
   Jenny Saville Territories | Creative Commons | STIRworld Jenny Saville
   Territories Image: Courtesy of Creative Commons

   Most often or rather more easily we speak of the female gaze in the
   context of contemporary feminist art, we might think of selfie
   feminists such as Petra Collins (who goes by girlgaze on social media)
   or performative photographers like Pushpamala N. Another aspect of the
   examples I have mentioned is the medium they favour, namely
   photography, the female gaze has made quite a place for itself within
   the field of visual art but is it really limited to the medium?
   Jenny Saville in Studio | Creative Commons | STIRworld Jenny Saville in
   Studio Image: Courtesy of Creative Commons

--
   public masks, commenting on social stereotypes and the artifice of
   creating an identity, maybe even those acceptable female identities.
   The works famed for their social commentary, depicted rich inner
   landscapes despite not trying at self-reflectiveness, and were
   particularly poignant because of their photographic medium. The gaze
   made prominent through a lens, could it be translated in brushstrokes
   and paint? Perhaps yes, as we were to see in the works of Jenny
   Saville, large canvas paintings of the nude female form realistic in
   all its cellulite glory, depicting the artist herself. In using herself
   as a subject Saville did not shy away from imperfections of real-world
   beauty as refreshingly honest, complex, fragile, and passing. Further
   adding to the nuances of medium in context of the gaze, are the
   photographic and sculptural works by Mari Katayama. The artist who was
   born with a deformity of the bones called tibial hemimelia, explored or
   rather questioned traditional beauty standards through her art, looking
   at physical imperfections as being perhaps more representative of
   mainstream beauty than air-brushed perfection that is sold to us by the
   media.
   Still, Metropolitan Museum of Art | Female Gaze | STIRworld Still,
   Metropolitan Museum of Art Image: Courtesy of Creative Commons

   What we can understand through the examples given above is that the
   concept of the female gaze reclaims not just the female body but also
   the idea of its beauty, its depiction, although I don’t believe it is
   limited to just so. We spoke of rich inner landscapes explored through
   the work, but are these ‘inner worlds’ only in the context of visual
   beauty? At first glance it might seem so but what one sees in most of
   these works is the spill over of the emotional underbelly of the
   feminine existence – vulnerability, inner narratives, power struggles
   at both the individual level and in the broader social strata. The
   feminine gaze in art is perhaps more than just the surface, it is
   nuanced, it is ever-changing in a quest of discovery of a deeper
   feminine one that balances power and sensuality, fragility and
   strength, malleability but on one’s own terms and one that is not
   limited to domain of the female.
   Jenny Saville portrait | Female Gaze | STIRworld Jenny Saville portrait
   Image: Courtesy of Creative Commons
   Read on:
     * Contemporary Art
     * Feminist Art
--
   LEARN MORE AGREE

   IFRAME: https://www.googletagmanager.com/ns.html?id=GTM-T4CPZ79

   STIR STIRworld Venus of Urbino | Female Gaze | STIRworld

The art of the female gaze…what is it?

Exploring the evolving lens of the female gaze beyond filmic studies.

   by Girinandini Singh | Published on : Oct 22, 2021
