   the eye signals that others give you.
   George Bush, Binoculars With Caps On
   X-ray vision can come in handy

The Power Of Holding A Gaze

   Establishing and maintaining eye contact comfortably with another
   person can be the basis for successful communication, giving you and
   the person you're communicating with a feeling of wellbeing and trust.
   Sometimes, eye contact can be uncomfortable though, such as when the
   other person seems dishonest, untrustworthy, or angry. Whether the
   interaction is comfortable or not has to do, in part, with the way that
   a person looks, or doesn't look, at you. The intensity and length of
   time she holds your eye influences the meaning of the gaze. The
   following sections explain the different attitudes that a held gaze can
   mean.

   When a person holds your gaze he or she is telling you one of two
   things: They find you attractive or interesting, or they may be feeling
   some anger or hostility towards you for whatever reason and are
   offering you a non-verbal challenge. How do you tell the difference?
   Look at their pupils: In the first case, the pupils should be dilated;
--
   encounters are most successful in dimly lit places because everyone's
   pupils dilate and create the impression that couples are interested in
   each other.

   When lovers gaze deep into each other's eyes, they are unknowingly
   looking for pupil-dilation signals and each becomes excited by the
   dilation of the other's pupils. Research has shown that when
   pornographic films are shown to men their pupils can dilate to almost
   three times their size. Research shows that most women's eyes dilate to
--
   eyebrows, it also gives the person a mysterious, secretive look and new
   research shows that this is the expression many women have on their
   faces immediately before having an orgasm.

  Gaze Behavior - Where Do You Look?

   It is only when you see 'eye to eye' with another person that a real
   basis for communication can be established. While some people can make
   us feel comfortable when they talk with us, others make us feel ill at
   ease and some seem untrustworthy. Initially, this has to do with the
   length of time that they look at us or with how long they hold our gaze
   as they speak.

   Michael Argyle, a pioneer of social psychology and nonverbal
   communication skills in Britain, found that when Westerners and
   Europeans talk, their average gaze time is around 60%, consisting of
   40% gaze time when talking, 75% when listening and 30% mutual gazing.
   He recorded the average gaze length to be 3 seconds and the length of a
   mutual gaze was 1.5 seconds. The amount of eye contact in a typical
   conversation ranges from 25% to 100%, depending on who's talking and
   what culture they're from. When we talk we maintain 40 to 60% eye
   contact with an average of 80% eye contact when listening. The notable
   exception to this rule is Japan and some Asian and South American
--

   Argyle found that when person A likes person B, he will look at him a
   lot. This causes B to think that A likes him, so B will like A in
   return. In other words, in most cultures, to build a good rapport with
   another person, your gaze should meet theirs about 60% to 70% of the
   time. This will also cause them to begin to like you. It is not
   surprising, therefore, that the nervous, timid person who meets our
   gaze less than one-third of the time is rarely trusted. This is also
   why, in negotiations, dark tinted glasses should be avoided as they
   make others feel you are either staring at them or trying to avoid
   them.

   As with most body language and gestures, the length of time that one
   person gazes at another can be culturally determined. Always be sure to
   consider cultural circumstances before jumping to conclusions. The
   safest rule when travelling to places such as Japan is to mirror the
   gaze time of your hosts.

   When two people meet and make eye contact for the first time, it's
   usually the person who is subordinate who looks away first. This means
   that not looking away becomes a subtle way to deliver a challenge or
   show disagreement when someone gives their opinion or point of view.
   Where the status of the other person is higher, however, for example,
   the person is your boss, you can send a clear message of disagreement
   by holding his gaze for only several seconds longer than would be
   usually acceptable. But it's not a good idea to do this regularly with
   your boss if you want to keep your job.

  Maintaining Contact In Awkward Circumstances
--

  How to Lock In Men's Attention

   When a woman wants to get a man's attention across a room she will meet
   his gaze, hold it for two to three seconds, then look away and down.
   This gaze is long enough for her to send him a message of interest and
   potential submission. An experiment by Monika Moore PhD, of Websters
   University, showed that most men are not hardwired to read a woman's
   first gaze signal so she usually needs to repeat it three times before
   the average man picks up on it, four times for really slow men and five
   or more times for the especially thick. When she finally gets his
   attention she will often use a small version of the Eyebrow Flash that
   is a small, subtle eye-widening gesture that tells him the signal was
--
   people expected. They were right. Lie-catching dropped to an average of
   25%, with men scoring a dismal 15% success and women 35%. Women's more
   intuitive brains were better than men's in detecting voice changes,
   pupil dilation and other cues that gave the liar away. This shows that
   gaze alone is not a reliable signal of lying and you need to observe
   other gestures as well.

   When a person's gaze meets yours for more than two-thirds of the time,
   it can mean one of two things: first, he finds you interesting or
   appealing, in which case he'll also have dilated pupils; or second,
   he's hostile towards you and could be issuing a challenge, in which
   case the pupils will be constricted. As mentioned, women are good at
--
   slap in the face.

  Limiting Verbal Or Physical Aggression

   Most primates avert their gaze to show submission. If an ape is going
   to display aggression or is likely to attack, it will lock eyes onto
   its victim. To avoid being attacked, the victim win look away and try
   to make itself appear smaller. Scientific evidence shows that
   submission behavior appears to be hardwired into primate brains for
   survival reasons. Under attack, we make ourselves appear smaller by
   hunching our shoulders, pulling our arms in close to the body, pressing
   our knees together and locking our ankles under a chair, dropping our
   chin to the chest to protect the throat and averting our gaze by
   looking away. These gestures activate an 'off switch' in the brain of
   the aggressor and the attack can be avoided.

   This is an ideal position to take if you are being reprimanded by a
--
   convincing.

  The Geography of the Face

   The geographical area of a person's face and body that you gaze upon
   can also dramatically affect the outcome of a face-to-face encounter.

   When you've finished reading this next section, try out the techniques
   discussed - without warning anyone - and you'll experience the powerful
--

   There are three basic types of gazing: Social Gazing, Intimate Gazing
   and Power Gazing.

    1. The Social Gaze

   Experiments into gazing reveal that during social encounters the
   gazer's eyes look in a triangular area on the other person's face
   between the eyes and the mouth for about 90% of the gaze time.

   This is the area of the face we look at in a non-threatening
   environment. The other person will perceive you as non-aggressive.

   Social Gaze Area
   The Social Gazing area

    2. The Intimate Gaze

   When people approach each other from a distance, they look quickly
   between the other person's face and lower body to first establish what
   the sex of the person is and then a second time to determine a level of
   interest in them. This gaze is across the eyes and below the chin to
   lower parts of the person's body. In close encounters, it's the
   triangular area between the eyes and the chest and for distant gazing
   it's from the eyes to the groin or below.

   Men and women use this gaze to show interest in each other and those
   who are interested will return the gaze. We usually give two quick
   glances and then look at their face and, despite most people's strong
   denials about it, hidden camera studies reveal that everyone does it,
   including nuns.

   Intimate Gaze Zone
   The Intimate Gaze zone

   As noted earlier, a woman's wider-ranging peripheral vision, however,
   allows her to check out a man's body from head to toe without getting
   caught. Male tunnel vision is why a man will move his gaze up and down
   a woman's body in a very obvious way. This is also the reason why men
   are constantly accused of checking out women's bodies visually at close
   range but women are rarely accused of the same, even though research
   shows that women do more of it than men. It's not that men gawk more
--
   once over. For a woman, it has the dual purpose of letting her check
   him out and at the same time send a submissive signal of looking away
   and down.

    3. The Power Gaze

   Power Gaze
   The Power Gaze

   Imagine the person has a third eye in the center of their forehead and
   look in a triangular area between the person's 'three' eyes. The impact
   this gaze has on the other person has to be experienced to be believed.

   Not only does it change the atmosphere to very serious, it can stop a
   bore dead in their tracks. By keeping your gaze directed at this area,
   you keep the screws firmly on them.

   Provided your gaze doesn't drop below the level of their eyes, the
   pressure will stay on them. Never use this in friendly or romantic
   encounters. But it works a treat on the person who you want to
   intimidate or on the person who simply won't shut up.

--
   that they can 'grasp the idea'.

  How to Hold Eye Contact with an Audience

   In audiences of up to 50 people it's possible to meet the gaze of each
   individual, letting them feel involved and keeping their attention. In
   larger groups you usually stand further back, so a different approach
   is needed. By pegging a real or imaginary point or person at each
   corner of the group and one in the center, when you stand at a distance
--
   contact when listening to other men than when listening to women.

  Summary

   Where you direct your gaze has a powerful impact on the outcome of a
   face-to-face encounter. If you were a manager who was going to give a
   piece of your mind to an employee who was out of line or a parent
   reprimanding a child, which gaze would you use? If you use Social
   Gazing, the sting would be taken out of your words, regardless of how
   loud or threatening you might try to sound. Social Gazing would weaken
   your words but Intimate Gazing could either intimidate or embarrass
   them. Power Gazing, however, has a powerful effect on the receiver and
   tells them you mean business.

   What men describe as the 'come-on' look that women use relates to a
   sideways glance, dilated pupils and Intimate Gazing. If a woman wants
   to play hard to get, she needs to avoid using an Intimate Gaze and use
   Social Gazing instead. But most men miss a lot of it anyway. To use a
   Power Gaze during courting would leave a man or woman labelled as cold
   or unfriendly. When you use an Intimate Gaze on a potential partner,
   however, you give the game away. Women are expert at sending and
   receiving this gaze but, unfortunately, most men are not. When men use
   the Intimate Gaze it's usually blatantly obvious to women and men are
   generally unaware of having been given an Intimate Gaze by a woman,
   much to the frustration of the woman who gave it.

   Table of Contents, Body Language Dimensions Resources Page
   Previous Section, Body Language Dimensions Next Section, Body Language
