
    1.  Home
    2.  Articles
    3.  Literary
    4.  ‘I am a woman, not an exhibit.’ The effects of the male gaze in
       art, literature and today’s society

   02/03/2020
   6 minute to read
     * Share on Facebook
     * Share on X (Twitter)
     * (BUTTON) Share this article

‘I am a woman, not an exhibit.’ The effects of the male gaze in art,
literature and today’s society

   Journalist Naomi Frisby on Elizabeth Macneal's exploration of the male
   gaze in The Doll Factory and the parallels that can be drawn with
   today’s society.

   02/03/2020

--

   Elizabeth Macneal’s The Doll Factory is an intoxicating story of love,
   art, obsession, and one woman’s struggle for freedom and agency in
   Victorian London. Throughout this enthralling debut, Elizabeth brings
   the prevalence and ramifications of the male gaze into the spotlight.
   Here, journalist Naomi Frisby explores the parallels that can be drawn
   with today’s society, and the implications this has for us all.

   ‘I am a woman, not an exhibit.’ – Iris Whittle

   In 1975, film critic Laura Mulvey coined the term ‘the male gaze’. It
   refers to the presentation of women in visual arts and literature from
   a male, heterosexual perspective where women are depicted as sexual
   objects for the pleasure of the male viewer. Men have agency; women are
   passive and dehumanised.
--
   the shop where Iris is employed to paint dolls and stare at her through
   the window.

    By linking Silas and Louis, Elizabeth Macneal makes a direct
   correlation between the male gaze in art and the male gaze in society.
   The legacy of the PRB is one of red-haired, pale-skinned, long-necked
   women posed as courtly lovers in ancient, medieval or Shakespearian
   tales. The women connected to the movement are remembered as models,
   despite several of them – including Elizabeth Siddal – being painters
   in their own right. Laura Mulvey also made this connection. She
   described the male gaze as a social construct, emphasising that if
   women are seen as objects to be valued for their beauty, physique and
   sex appeal in art, they will also be seen as such in life.

    The male gaze and the idea that men are entitled to women’s bodies
   remain threaded throughout society. Only 30% of the art housed in the
   Tate group of galleries is by women.  Female characters made up just
   35% of speaking roles in the highest grossing films of 2018 - none of
   which had a female director. Women are more likely to read an equal
--
   ambitious and ‘will not be afraid to take up space’.

    There is hope in current society too. Social media movements such as
   #EverydaySexism and #MeToo have amplified women’s voices about the
   effects of the male gaze, while #AskHerMore and #ReadWomen highlighted
   women’s contributions to visual arts and literature.

    This year, the women associated with the PRB will finally have their
   agency recognised too. The work of twelve artists, including Elizabeth
